ABSTRACT:
In this study, the human cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) proteome was mapped using three different strategies prior to Orbitrap LC-MS/MS analysis: SDS-PAGE and mixed mode reversed phase-anion exchange for mapping the global CSF proteome, and hydrazide-based glycopeptide capture for mapping glycopeptides. A maximal protein set of 3081 proteins (28,811 peptide sequences) was identified, of which 520 were identified as glycoproteins from the glycopeptide enrichment strategy, including 1121 glycopeptides and their glycosylation sites. To our knowledge, this is the largest number of identified proteins and glycopeptides reported for CSF, including 417 glycosylation sites not previously reported. From parallel plasma samples, we identified 1050 proteins (9739 peptide sequences). An overlap of 877 proteins was found between the two body fluids, whereas 2204 proteins were identified only in CSF and 173 only in plasma. All mapping results are freely available via the new CSF Proteome Resource (http://probe.uib.no/csf-pr), which can be used to navigate the CSF proteome and help guide the selection of signature peptides in targeted quantitative proteomics.
METHODS:
EXPERIMENTAL PROCEDURES
The workflow of the four different experiments performed in this study is displayed in Fig. 1A, and described in detail below.
Biological Samples
CSF was collected by lumbar puncture of neurologically healthy (spinal anesthesia subjects (SAS)) individuals who, under written informed consent, were to undergo spinal anesthesia for surgery at the Department of Anesthesia and Intensive Care Medicine, Haukeland University Hospital. Information about the subjects can be found in supplemental Table S1. Parallel CSF and plasma samples were collected according to the published consensus protocol for CSF collection and biobanking. None of the patients experienced traumatic CSF taps. CSF samples were centrifuged and cells removed prior to proteomics analysis. Plasma was collected in K2 EDTA tubes and centrifuged at room temperature at 2300 × g for 25 min. Aliquots of 500 μl CSF from each of the 21 individuals included in this study were combined into a pool. A similar pool was generated for the plasma samples from 20 of the patients, as plasma from one patient could not be obtained. The study was approved by The Regional Committee for Medical and Health Research Ethics of Western Norway.
Chemicals
If not otherwise stated, all chemicals and products were purchased from Sigma-Aldrich (St. Louis, MO). All protein concentrations were measured using a Qubit™ fluorometer kit (Invitrogen, Carlsbrad, CA) according to the vendor's instructions.
Sample Preparation of CSF for SDS-PAGE
3 ml (1400 μg protein) of the CSF pool was up-concentrated to 20 μl using 3 kDa ultracentrifugation filters (Amicon Ultra-4, Merck Millipore, Billerica, MA), prerinsed with deionized water (MilliQ). The concentrated sample was protein depleted of 14 high abundant proteins using the human Multiple Affinity Removal System (MARS HU-14) 4.6 mm x 50 mm LC column (Agilent Technologies, Santa Clara, CA) according to the vendor's recommendations. The two resulting protein fractions (depleted and bound) were then concentrated using ultracentrifugation filters as described above expect the filters were coated with 1 ml 0.1% N-octyl-Beta-d-glucopyranoside (NOG).
Each fraction was dissolved in LDS sample buffer (Invitrogen) containing 10 mm DTT (GE Healthcare, Amersham Biosciences, Buckinghamshire, UK) at 95¦°C for 5 min, alkylated by adding up to 20 mm iodoacetamine (IAA), followed by incubation in room temperature and in the dark for 20 min, prior to gel separation in two separate lanes using a lab-casted 20 cm 5–15% SDS-polyacrylamide gradient gel. Samples were separated at 60 V for 16 h in 1x electrode running buffer (25 mm Tris base, 192 mm Glysine, and 0.1% SDS diluted in milliQ water). After protein separation, the gel was stained with Coomassie Brilliant Blue (GE Healthcare). The lanes were cut into a total of 83 gel slices as described in Fig. 1B, 37 slices from the lane with the bound (high abundant) protein fraction and 46 slices from the lane with the depleted fraction. The gel slices were in-gel digested (supplemental File S1A) using between 120 and 240 ng of trypsin, depending on the size of the band, before MS/MS analysis.
Sample Preparation of CSF for Mixed Mode Fractionation
1.6 ml (750 μg protein) CSF was concentrated and immunoaffinity depleted as described above. The entire amount of the depleted fraction (∼40 μg) and an aliquot (100 μg) from the bound fraction was in-solution trypsin digested (Supplementary File 1B), using 0.8 and 2 μg trypsin, respectively. After digestion, the samples were desalted using C18 Oasis™ μElution plates (Waters, Milford, MA) as described elsewhere. The two samples were then fractionated using mixed mode reversed phase-anion exchange (MM RP-AX) HPLC as described by Phillips et al.. A Promix MP 250 mm x 2.1 mm id, pore size 300 Å column (SIELC Technologies, Prospect Heights, IL) connected to an Agilent Technology 1260 off-line LC-system was used. The desalted and dried samples were resuspended in 120 μl buffer A (20 mm Ammonium formate/3% ACN, pH 6.5) and loaded onto the column.
The setup for the LC was as follows. The flow was always 50 μl/min and the gradient length was 70 min. From 0–45 min buffer B (2 mm Ammonium formate/80% ACN) increased linearly from 15% to 60%, from 45–55 min 60% B, from 55–65 min 100% B, and from 65–70 min 15% B. The depleted CSF sample was separated into 80 fractions, where a fraction was collected every 0.87 min from 0–70 min (some fractions at each end of the gradient were later combined to give the total number of 66 fractions). Ten fractions were collected for the bound sample, one fraction the first 2 mins and then one fraction every 7 mins from 2–70 min.
Sample Preparation of Plasma for Mixed Mode Fractionation
For the characterization of the plasma proteome, the same experimental setup as for the CSF characterization using MM (RP-AX) fractionation was applied to 40 μl plasma, representing roughly 2400 μg protein.
Preparation of CSF and Isolation of Glycopeptides by Solid-phase Extraction of N-linked Glycopeptides
Three milliliters (1200 μg protein) CSF was in-solution trypsin digested and further processed by solid-phase extraction of N-linked glycopeptides (SPEG) essentially as described in and, but with some exceptions. The CSF was purified and concentrated to 15 μl using 3 kDa ultracentrifugation filters precoated with 1 ml 0.1% NOG. Dilution with 135 μl denaturation buffer (8 m Urea/0.4 M Ammonium Bicarbonate (ambic)/0.1% SDS (Bio-Rad Laboratories, Hercules, CA) followed, and then 120 mm Tris(2-carboxyethyl)phosphine (TCEP) was added to a final concentration of 10 mm and a one hour incubation at 37¦°C. IAA was added to a final concentration of 12 mm, and incubated for 30 min in the dark. The sample was then diluted with 0.1 m ambic until the urea concentration in the sample was below 1 m, and trypsin digested (1:50 ratio trypsin:protein, Trypsin porcine (Promega, Madison, WI)) overnight at 37¦°C. The next day the sample was desalted using Oasis C18, oxidized and desalted again essentially as described in, with some exceptions. 100% formic acid (FA) was used for acidification, Oasis plates were used for the desalting, the sample was dried after the first desalting to remove ACN and resuspended in 400 μl 0.1% TFA before oxidation. The sample was coupled to 4 mg (133 μl) magnetic hydrazide beads (BioClone Inc. San Diego, CA) and further processed as described in. Beads and supernatant were separated using a Dynal® magnetic bead separation rack (Invitrogen). The released and now deglycosylated peptides were collected the following day as previously described, except that the hydrazide resin was washed only once and with 200 μl ambic, and then acidified with 7 μl 5 m hydrochloric acid and 200 μl 0.1% FA before desalting by Oasis C18 as described in. The SPEG processing was done in three separate experiments (1 ml CSF for each), which were combined before further processing.
The digested and SPEG processed sample containing the deglycosylated peptides (former glycopeptides) were fractionated into 20 fractions using MM (RP-AX) as described above with the following set-up: one fraction was collected between 0–2 min, one between 2–7 min, from 7–55 min fractions were collected every 3 min, and from 55–70 min every 5 min. The entire peptide amount from each fraction was injected for LC-MS analysis.
MS Analysis
Dry samples were dissolved to a final concentration of 0.1–5% FA before analysis on an LTQ Orbitrap Velos Pro mass spectrometer (Thermo Fischer Scientific, Bremen, Germany) equipped with a nano spray Flex ion source (Thermo Fischer Scientific), coupled to a Dionex Ultimate NCS-3000 LC system (Thermo Fischer Scientific). Approximately 0.5 μg of digested protein was loaded and desalted on a precolumn (Acclaim PepMap 100, 2 cm × 75 μm i.d. nanoViper column, packed with 3 μm C18 beads) at a flow rate of 5 μl/min for 6 min using an isocratic flow of 0.1% FA (v/v) with 2% ACN (v/v). Peptides were separated during a biphasic ACN gradient from two nanoflow UPLC pumps with flow rate of 280 nl/min on the analytical column (Acclaim PepMap 100, 15 cm × 75 μm i.d. nanoViper column, packed with 2 μm C18 beads). Solvent A was 0.1% FA (v/v) with 2% ACN (v/v). Solvent B was 0.1% FA (v/v) with 90% ACN (v/v). The gradient was 0–61.5 min ramp from 8–38% B, 61.5–64.5 min ramp from 38–90% B, and 64.5–69.5 min 90% B, followed by column conditioning for 12 min with 5% B. Data dependent acquisition was utilized and collision-induced dissociation (CID) with normalized collision energy of 35% and wideband-activation enabled. Survey full scan MS spectra (from m/z 300–2000) were acquired with resolution r = 60,000 at m/z 400. The 15 ions with the highest intensity were selected for MS/MS fragmentation. MS data were acquired over 90 min.
Analysis of LC-MS/MS Data
The acquired raw files were searched against the human Swiss-Prot database (from December 2012 - 20,226 entries) using SearchGUI v1.10.4 (search engines: OMSSA v2.1.9 and X!Tandem CYCLONE (2010.12.01.1)) and processed in PeptideShaker v0.19.0, http://peptide-shaker.googlecode.com. The search criteria were: carbamidomethylation of cystein as a fixed modification and oxidized methionine as a variable modification for all datasets. Deamidation of asparagine was set as a variable modification only for the glyco dataset. Precursor mass tolerance was 10 ppm, fragment mass tolerance 0.7 Da, and maximum number of missed cleavages by trypsin was 2. PeptideShaker converts search engine e-values into confidence values using the distribution of decoy matches as described by Nesvizhskii. For all four of our datasets a validation threshold of 1% false discovery rate was employed individually at the protein, peptide and peptide spectrum match (PSM) level. ProteoWizard v.3.0.3650 with default settings was used to convert the raw files to peak lists. Gene ontology analyses were performed using PANTHER.
Analysis of Glyco-data
The resulting data from the mapping of glycoproteins and -peptides required some manual interpretation to decide which peptides that were true glycopeptides, and which were unspecifically bound to the hydrazide beads during the protocol. The detailed analysis is described in Supplemental File 1C. For a site to be considered as a true glycosite, the peptide had to have at least one deamidated asparagine and contain the N-glyco sequence motif [N][XP̂][ST] (where X can be any amino acid except proline). However, if the deamidation was confidently assigned only to an asparagine outside the motif, the peptide was not considered to be a glycopeptide. To investigate the chance that a random peptide has both a deamidated asparagine and the N-glyco sequence motif, we researched the data from the global mixed-mode fractionated and depleted CSF experiment, but this time with deamidation as variable modification. After filtering the results, we found that 0.4% of the peptides in this nonglyco experiment had both a deamidation and the N-glyco motif, indicating a 0.4% chance for a false positive glycopeptide by our approach. Considering that we in addition performed glycopeptide enrichment in the glyco experiment, this false positive rate would in reality be even lower. The data postprocessing, performed in PeptideShaker, provides the position of the deamidated asparagine in the peptide sequence and also a location confidence. The location confidence tells us how confident the software is in assigning the modification to the specific amino acid (very confident, confident, doubtful or random, see Supplemental File 1C for details).