ABSTRACT:
Background
Brain degenerative protein modifications (DPMs) are associated with the apparition and progression of dementia, and at the same time, Alzheimer’s disease with cerebrovascular disease (AD + CVD) is the most prevalent form of dementia in the elder population. Thus, understanding the role(s) of brain DPMs in this dementia subtype may provide novel insight on the disease pathogenesis and may aid on the development of novel diagnostic and therapeutic tools. Two essential DPMs known to promote inflammation in several human diseases are the ureido DPMs (uDPMs) arginine citrullination and lysine carbamylation, although they have distinct enzymatic and non-enzymatic origins, respectively. Nevertheless, the implication of uDPMs in the neuropathology of dementia remains poorly understood.
Methods
In this study, we use the state-of-the-art, ultracentrifugation-electrostatic repulsion hydrophilic interaction chromatography (UC-ERLIC)-coupled mass spectrometry technology to undertake a comparative characterization of uDPMs in the soluble and particulate postmortem brain fractions of subjects diagnosed with AD + CVD and age-matched controls.
Results
An increase in the formation of uDPMs was observed in all the profiled AD + CVD brains. Citrulline-containing proteins were found more abundant in the soluble fraction of AD + CVD whereas homocitrulline-containing proteins were preferentially abundant in the particulate fraction of AD + CVD brains. Several dementia-specific citrulline residues were also identified in soluble proteins previously categorized as pro-immunogenic, which include the receptor P2X7, alpha-internexin, GFAP, CNP, MBP, and histones. Similarly, diverse dementia-specific homocitrulline residues were also observed in the particulate fractions of AD + CVD in proteins that have been vastly implicated in neuropathology. Intriguingly, we also found that the amino acids immediately flanking arginine residues may specifically influence the increase in protein citrullination.
Conclusions
Taken together, these results indicate that uDPMs widely contribute to the pathophysiology of AD + CVD by promoting neuroinflammation and proteinopathy. Furthermore, the obtained results could help to identify disease-associated proteins that can act as potential targets for therapeutic intervention or as novel biomarkers of specific neuropathology.
Electronic supplementary material
The online version of this article (10.1186/s12974-017-0946-y) contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.
METHODS:
Methods
Chemicals and reagents
All the reagents used in this study were purchased from Sigma-Aldrich (St. Louis, MO, USA) unless otherwise specified. Protease inhibitor cocktail tablets were purchased from Roche (Basel, Switzerland), and sequencing-grade-modified trypsin was purchased from Promega (Madison, WI, USA).
Postmortem brain tissues
AD + CVD and healthy age-matched control (Ctrl) autopsied human brain tissues (middle temporal lobe, BA21 region) were generously donated by the Harvard Brain Tissue Resource Center (HBTRC, Boston, MA, USA). All patients met clinical diagnosis for dementia and histological criteria for AD + CVD (mixed dementias) at the time of autopsy. The available details of the samples, which include age, postmortem delay, and gender can be found in Additional file 1: Table S1. Three biological replicates were independently analyzed in this study for each experimental condition (soluble and particulate proteomes). Brain tissues were stored in liquid nitrogen from the time of autopsy and subsequently kept at −150 °C until use. BA21 brain region was dissected, meninges were removed, and ~ 100 mg of tissue from each subject were washed thrice during 10 min in 1X PBS.
Homogenization of postmortem brain tissues
Dissected brain tissues were homogenized as previously described, and all the following described procedures on postmortem tissues were performed on ice. Brain tissues were suspended in 250 μL of homogenization buffer (0.5% (w/v) sodium deoxycholate (SDC) in 100 mM ammonium acetate (AA) (pH 6.0) or 1% (w/v) N-lauroylsarcosine in 30 mM Tris-HCl (pH 7.4) and 150 mM NaCl and were supplemented with protease inhibitor cocktail. Approximately, 100 mg of previously washed metallic beads (0.9–2.0-mm particles) were added to each safe-lock tube that contained the tissues and homogenization buffer. Homogenization was then performed using the bullet blender homogenizer (Next Advance, NY, USA) at high intensity during 5 min at 4 °C. The tissue homogenates were subsequently centrifuged at 10,000 × g, 4 °C, for 10 min, and the supernatants were collected. Remaining pellets were subject to further rounds of homogenization till the pellet was not observable. The obtained supernatants from each round of homogenization were finally combined and briefly vortexed.
Isolation of the soluble and particulate brain proteomes by UC-ERLIC
Soluble and particulate brain proteomes were isolated from brain homogenates by ultracentrifugation-electrostatic repulsion hydrophilic interaction chromatography (UC-ERLIC)-coupled mass spectrometry-based proteomics as we recently reported, although with minor modifications in this study. Soluble homogenates were centrifuged at 3000 × g, 4 °C, during 10 min to remove cell debris. Supernatants were then subjected to ultracentrifugation at 112,000 × g, 4 °C, during 60 min, transferred to a new tube, and subjected to two further rounds of ultracentrifugation under the same conditions. Supernatants obtained from each round of ultracentrifugation were combined and transferred to new tubes (soluble fraction). The generated particulate pellets from the last two ultracentrifugation rounds were re-solubilized in 150 μL of 5% SDC (w/v) in 100 mM AA or 3% sodium dodecyl sulfate (SDS) in 1X PBS when the sample was homogenized in sarcosyl and combined to obtain the final particulate proteome.
In-solution tryptic digestion of human brain proteins
Soluble and particulate proteomes were subject to in-solution tryptic digestion as previously described. Briefly, 0.5 mg of proteins from each sample and condition previously quantified by bicinchoninic acid protein assay (BCA) were reduced with 10 mM dithiothreitol (DTT) at 60 °C during 30 min. Proteins were alkylated with 20 mM iodoacetamide at room temperature protected from the light during 45 min. Subsequently, the samples were diluted 10-fold with 100 mM AA containing 10 mM DTT and incubated at 37 °C for 30 min. Digestion was performed at 30 °C overnight at 1:20 (w/w) enzyme-to-substrate ratio using sequencing-grade-modified trypsin. Enzymatic digestion was quenched by addition of 0.5% formic acid (FA). SDC under acidic conditions was pelleted by centrifugation at 12,000 × g, 4 °C, for 10 min as previously indicated. The supernatant containing tryptic-digested peptides was then collected, and the SDC pellet was re-suspended in 0.5% ammonium hydroxide for further peptide recovery. SDC was again precipitated by the addition of 0.5% FA and pelleted by centrifugation at 12,000 × g, 4 °C, for 10 min. After centrifugation, the supernatant was collected. Recovery of peptides from the SDC pellet was performed thrice. All the supernatants were combined together. Tryptic-digested peptides were desalted using a C-18 Sep-pack 1 g cartridge (Waters, Milford, MA, USA). Elution was performed with 1 mL of 75% acetonitrile (ACN), 0.1% FA buffer. The eluted peptides were then dried using a vacuum concentrator (Eppendorf, Hamburg, Germany) and reconstituted for HPLC fractionation with 200 μL of 80% ACN, 0.1% acetic acid.
In-gel digestion of human brain proteins
SDS-solubilized proteins from the sarcosyl particulate fractions were resolved in a 12% SDS-PAGE gel. PAGE gel was stained using coomassie brilliant blue, and protein lanes were divided in 12 main areas according to the observed protein intensities. Gel lanes were cut into approximately 1-mm2 cubes and washed with 25 mM ammonium bicarbonate (ABB) in 50% ACN. Peptides contained in distained gel pieces were reduced in 10 mM DTT in 25 mM ABB at 60 °C for 1 h and subsequently alkylated in 55 mM IAA in 25 mM ABB at room temperature for 45 min in the dark. The gel cubes were then dehydrated in 100% ACN in two washes for 1 min each and dried in the speedvac for 5 min at 30 °C. Tryptic digestion of proteins was performed overnight at 37 °C by the addition of 10 ng/μl of sequencing-grade-modified trypsin (prepared in 25 mM ABB buffer). Tryptic-digested peptides were extracted from the gel cubes with 50% ACN and 5% acetic acid by vigorous vortexing during 30 min. The extraction step was repeated four times, and the obtained supernatants were combined and dried in the speedvac. The dried peptides were then re-suspended in 3% ACN, 0.1% FA, for subsequent LC-MS/MS analysis.
High-pressure liquid chromatography fractionation
Reconstituted tryptic peptides after in-solution digestion were fractionated by a PolyWAX column (4.6 × 200 mm, 3 μm, PolyLC, Columbia, MD, USA) using a Shimadzu Prominence UFLC system (Kyoto, Japan). Peptide intensities were monitored at 280 nm. Peptides were separated in a 72-min gradient using 80% ACN, 0.1% acetic acid, as mobile phase A, and 10% ACN, 0.1% FA, as mobile phase B. Separation of peptides was carried out in a 60-min gradient at a flow rate of 1 ml/min as follows: 0% for 5 min, 0–20% B for 25 min, 20–33% B for 10 min, 33–60% B for 10 min, and 60–100% B for 5 min, followed by 10 min at 100% B. Fractions were collected every minute, partially dried in a vacuum concentrator to reduce the volume, and pooled according to peak intensities. Combined fractions were dried completely and reconstituted in 3% ACN, 0.1% FA.
Liquid chromatography mass spectrometry analysis
Analysis of peptides was performed using an Orbitrap Elite mass spectrometer coupled with a Dionex UltiMate 3000 UHPLC system from Thermo Fisher Scientific Inc. (Bremen, Germany). Approximately, 2 μg of peptides were injected into a reverse phase Acclaim PepMap RSL column (75 μm ID × 15 cm, 2-μm particle size, Thermo Fisher Scientific Inc.) maintained at 35 °C and using a flow rate of 0.3 μL/min. Peptides were separated in a 60-min gradient using 0.1% FA as mobile phase A and 90% ACN, 0.1% FA, as mobile phase B. The gradient used for the separation of peptides was as follows: starting at 3% mobile phase B for 1 min, 3–35% mobile phase B over 47 min, 35–50% mobile phase B over 4 min, and 50–80% mobile phase B in 6 s and maintained isocratic for 78 s. Then, reverted to initial conditions over 6 s and maintained isocratic for 6.5 min. Tryptic-digested peptides were sprayed using a Bruker-Michrom Inc. Michrom’s Thermo Captive Spray nanoelectrospray ion source (Bruker-Michrom Inc., Auburn, CA, USA) with 1.5 kV spray voltage. Orbitrap Elite mass spectrometer was set to positive mode for data acquisition using Xcalibur 2.2 SP1.48 software (Thermo Fisher Scientific Inc., Bremen, Germany). Data acquisition was performed by alternating between full Fourier transform-mass spectrometry (FT-MS; 350–2000 m/z, resolution 60,000, 1 μscan per spectrum) and FT-MS/MS (150–2000 m/z, resolution 30,000, 1 μscan per spectrum) for the ten most intense ions above 500 count threshold with charge > + 2. Fragmentation was performed using high-energy collisional dissociation (HCD) mode with 32% normalized collision energy. Automatic gain control values for FT-MS and FT-MS/MS were set at 1 × 106.
Bioinformatics and data analysis
LC-MS/MS data was searched in PEAKS Studio version 7.5 (Bioinformatics Solutions, Waterloo, Canada). Precursor ion tolerance and fragment ion tolerance were kept during the database search at 10 ppm and 0.05 Da, respectively. Trypsin with non-specific cleavage on both ends of the peptide was allowed. Carbamidomethylation of cysteine residues was considered as fixed modification. The PEAKS PTM algorithm was used to identify the presence of uDPMs in the brain proteomes. False discovery rate was kept as default by the software, and decoy-target identification of the peptides was performed. To extract the most abundant peptides from the particulate brain proteomes, only those peptides with relative signal intensities higher or equal to 108 were considered. This restrictive criterion allowed for the unique consideration of the most confidently identified peptides. The mean signal intensity was calculated individually for every subject and experimental condition (soluble and particulate brain proteomes) and contributed to the calculation of the grand mean signal intensity for each group, which has been reported here.
Enrichment distribution of the AD + CVD particulate brain proteomes was analyzed using the enrichment analysis software FunRich as described. The absolute number of unique proteins with identified citrullinated (Arg) and carbamylated (Lys) residues was included in this analysis. To analyze the aggregation pattern of the identified neuroinflammatory markers in AD + CVD only the proteins that were consistently identified in at least two individuals of the same group were considered. Student’s t test was performed to establish statistical significance between experimental groups (p < 0.05). All statistical analyses and graphs were performed and plotted in GraphPad Prism v6.01 (La Jolla, CA, USA). The bioinformatics study of the biochemical composition of hypercitrullinated proteins in the brain proteome of AD + CVD was performed using an in-house-created macro for Microsoft Excel. All the possible citrulline triplets were screened in this analysis resulting in a total of 400 combinations as shown in Additional file 2: Dataset 1. The total signal intensity for every group of peptides triplet was then ranked from the highest to lowest. Only those top five triplets that were consistently identified as hypercitrullinated in all subjects and conditions are reported. Data is reported as mean ± standard deviation (SD).