ABSTRACT:
How genomic and transcriptomic alterations affect the functional proteome in lung cancer is not fully understood. Here, we integrate DNA copy number, somatic mutations, RNA-sequencing, and expression proteomics in a cohort of 108 squamous cell lung cancer (SCC) patients. We identify three proteomic subtypes, two of which (Inflamed, Redox) comprise 87% of tumors. The Inflamed subtype is enriched with neutrophils, B-cells, and monocytes and expresses more PD-1. Redox tumours are enriched for oxidation-reduction and glutathione pathways and harbor more NFE2L2/KEAP1 alterations and copy gain in the 3q2 locus. Proteomic subtypes are not associated with patient survival. However, B-cell-rich tertiary lymph node structures, more common in Inflamed, are associated with better survival. We identify metabolic vulnerabilities (TP63, PSAT1, and TFRC) in Redox. Our work provides a powerful resource for lung SCC biology and suggests therapeutic opportunities based on redox metabolism and immune cell infiltrates.
Squamous cell lung cancer has dismal prognosis due to the dearth of effective treatments. Here, the authors perform an integrated proteogenomic analysis of the disease, revealing three proteomics-based subtypes and suggesting potential therapeutic opportunities.
METHODS:
Methods
Clinical samples
We identified 108 patients consented to the Total Cancer CareTM protocol that had donated snap frozen lung squamous cell carcinoma tumor tissues with linked molecular data as well as clinical history, tumor pathology, and patient outcomes (Table 1, Supplementary Data 1, Supplementary Fig. 1). Samples were collected under the Moffitt’s Total Cancer Care protocol (Liberty IRB # 12.11.0023) and Moffitt’s General Banking protocol (IRB #: USF 101642). Described experiments were considered non-human subjects research and performed under protocol MCC #50083. De-identified clinical attributes including tumor cellularity, tumor necrosis, smoking status, and TNM staging can be found in Supplementary Data 1. Cohort demographics not included in supplementary data including age, race, and gender are available through dbGaP or by request to authors. Frozen tissue samples were randomized with respect to stage, recurrence, gender, vital status and age, were homogenized with a BioPulverizer (Biospec) in liquid nitrogen, and split into two approximately equal aliquots for genomic and proteomic analyses.
Expression proteomics
Homogenized tissue samples were resuspended in lysis buffer containing 20 mM HEPES, pH 8.0, 9 M urea, 1 mM sodium orthovanadate, 2.5 mM sodium pyrophosphate, and 1 mM β-glycerophosphate (Supplementary Fig. 13). After brief sonication, the lysate was cleared by centrifugation at 10,000 × g at 15 °C for 30 min. Protein concentration was determined by Bradford Assay (Coomassie Plus, Pierce), and 1 mg of total protein was digested for each sample (Supplementary Fig. 14). The proteins were reduced with 4.5 mM DTT at 60 °C for 20 min followed by alkylation with 11 mM iodoacetamide at room temperature for 15 min in the dark. The sample was then diluted 4-fold to a final concentration of 2 M urea, 20 mM HEPES, pH 8.0, and trypsin digestion was carried out overnight at 37 °C with an enzyme/substrate w/w ratio of 1/25.
The digested peptide solution was acidified with 20% TFA to a final TFA concentration of 1%. After incubation at room temperature for 10 min, the solution was cleared by centrifugation at 10,000 × g at 15 °C for 15 min. Sep-Pak cartridges were washed with 5 ml acetonitrile followed by 3 ml and 4 ml washes with Sep-Pak solvent A (aqueous 0.1% TFA). After acidified peptides were loaded, the cartridge was washed with 1, 5, and 6 ml of Sep-Pak solvent A. Elution was carried out three times using 2 ml of Sep-Pak solvent B (aqueous 40% acetonitrile with 0.1% TFA). After freezing, the peptides were lyophilized to dryness over 2 days. For DIA, aliquots (500 ng) of total protein digest were injected for each sample. Two aliquots (100 μg each) of total protein digest were retained for TMT labeling. The remaining material was saved for future experiments (e.g., phosphoproteomics).
The same UPLC conditions were used as described above for the TMT experiments. The mass spectrometry method utilized MS1 scans alternated with looped 18 narrow window data independent acquisition (DIA) tandem mass spectrometry scans covering the m/z range from 450 to 1080. The MS/MS isolation windows from 450 to 900 were set at 5 Th and the isolation windows from 900 to 1080 were set at 8 Th. Resolution was set at 70,000 for MS1 and 17,500 for MS/MS. Twenty-five femtomoles of standard peptides (PRTC) were spiked in each LC-MS/MS analysis to monitor instrument performance. The acquisition sequence can be found in Supplementary Data 3.
The tandem mass tag (TMT) experimental design, specifically how pools and tumors were assigned in 29 batches, can be found in Supplementary Data 3. After Sep-Pak, 100 μg aliquots of tryptic peptides were lyophilized overnight and dissolved in 100 μg of aqueous 100 mM Triethylammonium bicarbonate (TEAB) buffer. TMT reagents (0.8 mg) were equilibrated to room temperature and 41 μl of anhydrous acetonitrile was added to each tube and vortexed for 5 min. The TMT labeling was carried out by mixing the TMT reagent with peptide mixture and incubating at room temperature for 1 h. The labeling was quenched by adding 8 μl of 5% hydroxylamine and incubating for 15 min. For quality control, an aliquot (1 μl) of the labeled digest was analyzed by LC-MS/MS to determine the effectiveness of the labeling.
After chemical labeling, LC-MS/MS analysis was performed on each TMT channel followed by Mascot/Sequest searches, and the results were summarized in Scaffold. Spectral counting was used to calculate percentage of peptides labeled with TMT reagent (Supplementary Data 3). One tumor sample (batch 05, channel 126) required relabeling. For two experiments, the labels for channel 128 and channel 129 were switched (batch 24 and batch 29), and the tumor identification numbers were corrected prior to downstream analysis. In addition, MaxQuant analysis was also performed on each TMT channel to verify correct TMT channel was labeled for each sample and to examine the crosstalk between channels (Supplementary Data 3).
Dried peptides were reconstituted in 20 mM ammonium formate, pH 10. bRPLC separation was carried out on Dionex Ultimate3000 RSLC UPLC using a 4.6 mm ID × 100 mm column (XBridge, Waters) packed with C18, 3.5 μm particle size at a 0.6 ml/min flow rate. The gradient setting was: 100% bRPLC A (aqueous 2% acetonitrile with 5 mM ammonium formate, pH 10) for 9 min, then the concentration of bRPLC solvent B (aqueous 90% acetonitrile with 5 mM ammonium formate, pH 10) was increased to 6% over 4 min, to 28.5% over 50 min, to 34% over 5.5 min, and to 60% over 13 min, and then kept constant for 8.5 min prior to re-equilibration at the original conditions. Twelve concatenated fractions were analyzed with LC-MS/MS for each TMT experiment (Supplementary Fig. 15).
A nanoflow ultra-high performance liquid chromatograph (RSLC, Dionex, Sunnyvale, CA) interfaced with an electrospray quadrupole-orbital ion trap mass spectrometer (Q Exactive Plus, Thermo, San Jose, CA) was used for tandem mass spectrometry peptide sequencing experiments. The sample was first loaded onto a pre-column (2 cm × 100 µm ID packed with C18 reversed-phase resin, 5 µm particle size, 100 Å pore size) and washed for 8 min with aqueous 2% acetonitrile and 0.04% TFA. The trapped peptides were eluted onto the analytical column, (C18, 75 µm ID × 50 cm, 2 µm, 100 Å, Dionex, Sunnyvale, CA). The 90 min gradient was programmed as: 95% solvent A (aqueous 2% acetonitrile + 0.1% formic acid) for 8 min, solvent B (aqueous 90% acetonitrile + 0.1% formic acid) from 5% to 38.5% in 60 min, then from 38.5 to 90% in 7 min, and held at 90% for 5 min, followed by solvent B from 90 to 5% in 1 min and re-equilibration for 10 min. The flow rate on analytical column was 300 nl/min. Sixteen tandem mass spectra were collected in a data-dependent manner following each survey scan using 60 sec exclusion for previously sampled peptide peaks using normalized collision energy 30. Twenty-five femtomoles of PRTC was spiked in each LC-MS/MS analysis to monitor instrument performance. Total LC-MS/MS time was 87 days. The acquisition sequence can be found in Supplementary Data 3 (Supplementary Fig. 16).
Molecular genomics
Qiagen’s AllPrep DNA/RNA Mini kit was used for the simultaneous purification of genomic DNA and total RNA from the homogenized tumor tissue aliquot.
RNAseq was performed using the NuGen Ovation Encore Complete RNAseq kit, which generates strand-specific total RNAseq libraries (Nugen, Inc., San Carlos, CA). Following quality control screening on the NanoDrop to assess 260 nm/230 nm and 260 nm/280 nm light absorbance ratios as a metric for sample purity, the samples were screened on the Agilent BioAnalyzer RNA Nano chip to generate an RNA Integrity Number (RIN) (Agilent Technologies, Santa Clara, CA). An aliquot of DNase-treated total RNA (100 ng) was then used to generate double-stranded cDNA, which was initiated with selective random priming allowing for the sequencing of total RNA, while avoiding rRNA and mtRNA transcripts. After primer annealing at 65 °C for 5 min, a first strand cDNA synthesis reaction was performed at 40 °C for 30 min using kit-supplied reverse transcription reagents (Nugen). Second-strand cDNA synthesis was performed in a 70 µl reaction volume at 16 °C for 1 h and the reaction was stopped by adding 45 µl of stop solution. The double-stranded cDNA was then fragmented to ~200 bp with the Covaris M220 sonicator (Covaris, Inc., Woburn, MA), followed by purification with Agencourt RNAClean XP (Beckman Coulter Life Sciences, Indianapolis, IN). The fragmented DNA was suspended in 10 µl of nuclease-free water, and end-repair was performed in a 13 µl volume for 30 min at 25 °C, followed by a heat inactivation at 70 °C for 10 min. A sample-specific indexed adapter was ligated to the end-repaired DNA for 30 min at 25 °C, followed by strand selection, a 1.8X volume RNAClean XP bead purification, and a second round of strand selection. Thirteen cycles of library amplification followed by a 1.2X volume RNAClean XP purification of the strand-selected library was performed, and finally, the library DNA was resuspended in 30 µl of nuclease-free water.
Final libraries were screened for library fragment size distribution using an Agilent BioAnalyzer High-Sensitivity DNA Chip. Libraries were then quantitated using the Kapa Library Quantification Kit (Roche Sequencing, Pleasanton, CA), normalized to 4 nM, and then sequenced on an Illumina NextSeq 500 150-cycle high-output flow cell in order to generate ~100 million paired-end reads of 75-bases in length for each sample (Illumina, Inc., San Diego, CA).
In order to assess the somatic mutation status in the squamous cell carcinoma samples, a custom Agilent SureSelect panel covering 154 total genes (151 genes from the ClearSeq Comprehensive Cancer Panel plus KMT2D, KEAP1, and NFE2L2) was designed and used for the enrichment of DNA libraries generated using the 200 ng input protocol of the Agilent SureSelect XT Library Kit (Agilent Technologies, Santa Clara, CA).
Genomic DNA samples were qualitatively assessed using the Agilent TapeStation and Genomic DNA screentape and the Qubit dsDNA high-sensitivity assay was used to quantify the samples (ThermoFisher, Waltham, MA). The samples were diluted in nuclease-free water to a concentration of 4 ng/µl at a volume of 50 µl and fragmented in 50 µl AFA Fiber screw-cap microtubes using a Covaris M220 sonicator (Covaris, Woburn, MA). The M220 Covaris instrument settings to fragment DNA to a target size of 150 to 200 bp were: Duty Factor (10%), Peak Incident Power (175), Cycles per Burst (200), Treatment Time (360 s), and water bath temperature (4 °C).
The fragmented DNA samples were then qualitatively assessed using a high-sensitivity DNA chip on the Agilent BioAnalyzer, and the fragmented DNA samples with an average size of 150–200 bp were then processed using the Agilent SureSelect XT library kit. The fragmented DNA samples were end-repaired using Klenow and T4 DNA polymerases along with a T4 polynucleotide kinase at 20 °C for 30 min. The blunt-end product was purified using Ampure XP beads with a 1.8X bead slurry to sample ratio (Beckman Coulter Life Sciences, Indianapolis, IN). Next, the 3’ ends of the blunt-end products were adenylated using dATP and Klenow fragment without exonuclease activity at 37 °C for 30 min. Following the adenylation reaction, another 1.8X ratio bead purification was performed. The adenylated product was then ligated to an Illumina sequencing compatible paired-end adapter using T4 DNA ligase at 20 °C for 15 min. The ligated product was purified using Ampure XP beads with a 1.8X ratio and the adapter-tagged purified product was then amplified using the Agilent Fusion Pfu-based DNA polymerase. An adapter-specific forward primer and an Illumina indexing reverse primer provided by Agilent were used for amplification. The cycling parameters were as follows: 98 °C for 2 min, 10 cycles of the following temperature program (98 °C for 30 s, 65 °C for 30 s, and 72 °C for 1 min), followed by a final elongation step for 10 min at 72 °C. The amplified product was purified using Ampure XP beads with a 1.8X ratio.
The DNA libraries were assessed for size and quantity using the DNA 1000 assay on the BioAnalyzer, and each DNA library was verified to have an average peak between 225 and 275 bp. The concentration generated from the QC report was used to calculate the input into the hybridization and capture reactions. In preparation for the hybridization and capture reactions, 750 ng of each DNA library was concentrated to a volume of 3.4 µl, and hybridization buffer, a SureSelect blocking mix, an RNase blocking mix, and a capture library hybridization mix were prepared. The blocking mix (5.6 µl) and DNA library (3.4 µl) were mixed by pipetting, carefully sealed, and transferred to a thermal cycler running the following program: 95 °C for 5 min, 65 °C for 16 h. After 5 min at 65 °C, the thermal cycler was paused and 20 µl of the capture library hybridization mix was added to the denatured DNA library while on the thermal cycler. The combined mixtures were mixed quickly by pipetting and carefully re-sealed before resuming the incubation at 65 °C for 16 h.
In preparation of the capture purification, streptavidin-coated beads were washed three times using a binding buffer and a magnetic separation device and a water bath was set to 65 °C. The enriched target DNA was captured using 200 µl of washed streptavidin-coated magnetic beads and mixed on a Jitterbug at 1600 rpm for 30 min at room temperature (Boekel Scientific, Trevose, PA). The beads in each sample were then pulled down by the magnetic separator and washed with 200 µl of SureSelect Wash Buffer 1 and re-captured for 15 min. The target-bound beads were washed three times at 65 °C with SureSelect Wash Buffer 2 and resuspended in 30 µl of nuclease-free water.
The enriched DNA libraries were PCR amplified and indexed using sample-specific and universal primers. Following a 2 min 98 °C denaturation, 16 cycles of PCR were performed as described above except that 57 °C was used as the annealing temperature. The amplified enriched libraries were Ampure XP purified with a 1.8X ratio and suspended in 30 µl of nuclease-free water. After size assessment on the high-sensitivity D1000 TapeStation DNA assay, the samples were quantified by Qubit and with the quantitative PCR-based Kapa Library Quantification kit (Roche Sequencing, Pleasanton, CA). Samples were diluted to 4 nM, pooled and prepared for sequencing on the NextSeq 500 sequencer. Two paired-end 2 × 75 v2 mid-output sequencing runs were performed in order to generate a target coverage of >150X of the genes in each sample.
In order to assess CNV and loss-of-heterozygosity (LOH) status, the Affymetrix CytoScan HD Assay was performed. The CytoScan HD assay uses approximately 750,000 SNP probes and 1.9 million non-polymorphic probes to report genome-wide copy number aberrations at a resolution of 25–50 kilobases.
Starting with 250 ng of tumor-derived DNA diluted at 50 ng/µl, an Nsp I digestion was performed at 37 °C for two hours in the presence of 1X bovine serum albumin (BSA). Following heat inactivation at for 20 min at 65 °C, vendor-supplied Nsp I adaptors were ligated to the digested sample DNA for three hours at 16 °C, followed by heat inactivation at 70 °C for 20 min. The ligated DNA samples were diluted four-fold and ligation-mediated PCR was performed in quadruplicate using an Affymetrix-specific TITANIUM Taq PCR kit (Clontech Laboratories, Inc., Mountain View, CA) following the CytoScan Assay User Manual.
After 30 cycles of PCR amplification, 3 µl of the amplified product was screened on a 2% agarose gel, and the PCR replicates were pooled, bead-purified, and quantitated according to the protocol. Amplified DNA samples were DNase I fragmented at 37 °C for 35 min, and the DNase was heat inactivated at 95 °C for 15 min. Two µl of fragmented PCR product was screened on a 4% agarose gel, and the fragmented DNA was end-labeled by terminal deoxynucleotidyltransferase in the presence of biotin for four hours at 37 °C followed by heat inactivation at 95 °C for 15 min.
A hybridization buffer was prepared and added to the fragmented and labeled DNA; after a 10 minute 95 °C denaturation, CytoScan HD arrays were hybridized at 50 °C for 16 h in an Affymetrix GeneChip Hybridization Oven 640. The following day, the hybridized arrays were washed and stained with biotinylated anti-streptavidin and a streptavidin-R phycoerythrin (SAPE) conjugate on the Affymetrix GeneChip Fluidics Station 450 according to the protocol. Finally, the arrays were scanned on an Affymetrix GeneChip Scanner 3000 7 G with autoloader and inspected for any chip defects or artifacts. The raw data generated from the assay were normalized, copy number status was calculated, and the data were reviewed for quality using the Affymetrix Chromosome Analysis Suite (ChAS) v. 3.1.
RNAseq
Sequence reads were aligned to the human reference genome (hs37d5) in a splice-aware fashion using Tophat2, allowing for accurate alignments of sequences across introns. Aligned sequences were assigned to exons using the HTseq package against RefSeq gene models to generate initial counts by region. Normalization, expression modeling, and difference testing were performed using DESeq2. RNAseq quality control includes RSeqC to examine read count metrics, alignment fraction, chromosomal alignment counts, expression distribution measures, and principal component analysis (PCA). PCA and hierarchical clustering were used to examine the data for outliers and identify any concerns about instrument performance or experimental design prior to further analysis. RNASeq abundances were log2 transformed, then de-batched with COMBAT to correct for kit-related batch effect (kit lot #: 1511366-B, 1412465-C, 1604466). We were able to quantify expression for 19,559 genes across the entire cohort.
Targeted exome sequencing
Sequence reads were aligned to the reference human genome (hs37d5) with the Burrows-Wheeler Aligner (BWA), and duplicate identification, insertion/deletion realignment, quality score recalibration, and variant identification were performed with PICARD (http://broadinstitute.github.io/picard/) and the Genome Analysis ToolKit (GATK). All genotypes (even reference) were determined across all samples at variant positions using GATK. We also sequenced 12 normal blood samples using the same procedures in order to remove artifacts and other false positives common to both tumor and normal samples. Various quality control measures were applied to determine depth of coverage in each sample across the targeted genes. Sequence variants were annotated using ANNOVAR, and summarized using spreadsheets and a genomic data visualization tool, VarSifter. Additional contextual information was incorporated, including allele frequency from other studies such as 1000 Genomes Project and the NHLBI Exome Sequence Project, in silico functional impact predictions, and observed impacts on function from databases such as ClinVar.
Copy number analysis
The Affymetrix CytoScan HD microarray was used for the identification of CNVs and Chromosome Analysis Suite (ChAS) software was utilized for analysis. The array consists of 2,696,550 probes that include 743,304 SNPs and 1,953,246 non-polymorphic probes at an average spacing of 1 probe per every 800 bp throughout the entire human genome. The average spacing of sampling for RefSeq genes is 1 probe per 880 bp and 96% of genes are represented. To infer ancestry of the samples, we used 395 HapMap samples (350,000 + common SNPs with >95% call rates) as reference for four ethnically diverse populations. SNP array data quality was assessed with Affymetrix “Median of the Absolute Values of all Pairwise Differences” (MAPD), which estimates the variability of log2 ratios over the complete array with robustness to overcome high biological variability as frequently found in tumor DNA samples. MAPD values below 0.25 were considered to be indicative for good quality. To calculate the CNV, the data were normalized to baseline reference intensities using 270 HapMap samples and 90 healthy normal individuals included in ChAS. The copy number states were determined by the Hidden Markov Model (HMM) algorithm using the human genome (hg19/NCBI build 37). To prevent the detection of false-positive CNVs arising due to array noise, only alterations that involved at least 50 consecutive probes and alterations >400 kb in length were considered in the analysis of gains or losses. Amplifications and deletions were analyzed separately. The detected CNVs were evaluated separately in terms of frequency and length.
LC-MS/MS processing
Protein identification was performed using the RefSeq human protein sequence database (version 78) supplemented with bovine and porcine trypsin sequences. Thermo.RAW files were converted to mzML peaklists using ProteoWizard msConvert. We used three separate search engines, MyriMatch (version 2.2.10165), MS-GF + (version 20160629), and Comet (version 2016.01rev1) to assign peptide sequences to tandem mass spectra. Precursor tolerance was set at 10 p.p.m. and fragment tolerance at 0.5 m/z, allowing semi-tryptic peptides using forward and reverse peptide sequences. Static modifications of 229 Da on lysine and N-terminal (TMT label) and 57 Da on cysteines (carboamidomethylation) were specified; while dynamic modifications of 16 Da on methionine (oxidation) and −17 Da on N-terminal Glutamine residues (pyroglutamine) were included.
Protein assembly
Spectral identification files from Myrimatch, MS-GF + and Comet (2088 files total) were converted to IDPicker 3 index files (idpXML) using IDPicker 3 (www.idpicker.org) and summarized in a single IDPicker database file. This assembly was filtered at a stringent 0.1% peptide-to-spectrum (PSM) FDR while requiring a minimum of 2 distinct peptides per protein, as described previously. To increase the number of high-quality PSMs, we limited the assembly to this set of proteins while relaxing the PSM to 1%. This process resulted in the identification of 2,954,487 spectra representing 158,160 distinct peptides corresponding to 8300 protein groups with a protein FDR of 4.75%. We further limited the number of proteins to those observed in at least 10% of the tumors, which resulted in a total of 4880 protein groups with a protein FDR of 1.3%. TMT reporter ion intensities were normalized across each peptide to correct for mixing variability and exported from IDP3 for further processing.
We used a method similar to internal reference scaling to derive protein group expression values that were comparable across TMT 6-plex experiments. Each of the 29 TMT 6-plexes contained four tumors and two tumor pool replicates, totaling 174 samples (116 tumors, 58 pool replicates). The pools were assayed on every TMT 6-plex to allow for controlling for variability between TMT experiments, with one pool fixed in channel 126 and the other varying channel between TMT experiments. Within each 6-plex injection replicate, spectral abundances for each channel were normalized with IRON (using the console command iron_generic --proteomics) against the m/z 126 reporter ion (ch-126 pool). For each spectrum, log ratios were calculated vs. the ch-126 pool. Protein-level rollup of log ratios (log ratioprotein) were calculated by averaging the individual spectral log ratios within each protein group. Initial individual ch-126 protein-level abundance estimates were calculated as the geometric mean of the unlogged spectral abundances within each protein group.
Protein-level abundance estimates for all individual ch-126 pools were then IRON normalized against the median ch-126 pool (“TMT-126 TMT13_01”; Supplementary Data 3) across all injection replicates. Abundance scales (Scaleprotein) for each protein group were then calculated as the geometric mean of the normalized unlogged ch-126 protein-level abundances. Normalized protein-level abundances for each injection replicate were then calculated by multiplying the protein-level abundance scales times the protein-level ratio [Scaleprotein × exp(log ratioprotein)]. Abundances were then log2 transformed and injection replicates averaged to yield the dataset used for all further downstream proteomics analyses.
Consensus clustering
The top 1000 most variable proteins by median absolute deviation were clustered using Consensus Cluster Plus with missing values ignored (treated as “NA”). Consensus Cluster Plus parameters were pItem = 0.8, pFeature = 1, clusterAlg = “hc”, distance = “pearson”, seed = 1234, innerLinkage = “complete”, finalLinkage = “complete”, and corUse = “pairwise.complete.obs”. Consensus clustering output provides cluster assignments and stability evidence for the identified k clusters. The process is repeated for multiple values of k. The purpose of the CDF plot (Supplementary Fig. 4A) is to find the smallest k at which the change of the area under the CDF curve (Supplementary Fig. 4B) is small, suggesting that there is not much benefit to further divisions. Here, we chose k = 5 since it was the first point which corresponded to less than 10% change in area, and larger k would have only given small additional increases in area. For our RNAseq-based assignments, we followed a similar strategy and took the top 1000 most variable genes by median absolute deviation (also observed in >90% of the samples) and clustered with identical parameters.
Gene-based sample classification
Wilkerson et al. predictor centroids were used to classify our RNAseq expression data according to the Wilkerson classification scheme (classical, basal, secretory, and primitive).
Unless otherwise noted, missing values were ignored (treated as “NA”). We tested for differential expression of genes/proteins using a nonparametric Wilcoxon rank-sum tests, and we defined significantly differentially expressed as having at least ±1.5 fold-change and a Benjamini-Hochberg adjusted P-value (Padj) less than or equal to 0.05. Unless otherwise noted, these comparisons and others were made for a given subtype or group vs. the rest of the cohort. For mutation and copy number comparisons, we report the results of two-sided Fisher exact test P-values for a given group compared to the rest of the population unless otherwise noted. We used Spearman’s correlations for correlating copy number, RNA, and protein expression with the “pairwise.complete.obs” argument in R, and we required at least 10% non-missing values in both sets of values being correlated. Pathway enrichment was assessed using Enrichr and MSigDB. Principal component analysis utilized the 4880 protein groups that were observed in >90% of the samples with missing values imputed to 0.
Deconvolution approaches
The ESTIMATE R package was used to calculate immune infiltration on RNAseq expression data. RNAseq data were unlogged and missing values imputed with 0 for the purpose of running CIBERSORT to assess relative abundance of immune cell types. CIBERSORT was run in relative mode with the LM22 signature gene file, 100 permutations, and quantile normalization disabled. Seventy five tumors passed the CIBERSORT goodness of fit threshold P-value < 0.05 for subsequent analysis. xCell was run using the default “N = 64” gene signature with the “RNA-seq?” option selected.
Gene and protein nomenclature
We refer to genes and their protein products by the official symbol provided by the Human Genome Organization’s Gene Nomenclature Committee (HGNC). If a gene’s synonym is more commonly used, for example “NRF2” instead of the official “NFE2L2”, then we provide both. We have referred to protein groups consisting of two or more similar gene symbols (e.g., “DEFA1 DEFA1B”) as the first entry (e.g., “DEFA1”) to improve readability and avoid confusion. Complete protein group information including naming is provided in proteomics Supplementary Data 3.
Survival analysis
Cox regression for overall survival (OS) and recurrence-free survival (RFS) was fitted to gene-level CNV, RNAseq expression, and protein expression data. Time-to-event for OS was time in years from date of sample collection to date of death and censored at date of last contact, and time-to-event for RFS was time in years from date of sample collection to date of first clinically confirmed recurrence if a patient recurred or died and censored at the date of last contact. The event for OS was death and for RFS was recurrence or death.
Meta-analysis
Meta-analysis was performed using the metaphor R package on gene-level CNV, RNAseq expression, and protein expression data. Three thousand four hundred eighty-four genes and their corresponding proteins present in all three datasets were used. When mapping gene symbols across datasets, in the few cases of duplicated gene symbols in protein expression data (due to protein grouping), one gene (protein group) was arbitrarily chosen to be included. A meta-analytic random-effects model was fitted using empirical Bayes as the heterogeneity estimator. The Storey q-value method was used to adjust p-values, and 15 genes were found with a q-value less than or equal to 0.3. Hazard ratios with 95% confidence intervals were plotted, and the upper limit of the confidence intervals were truncated at 3.5 for better visualization.
Pathology
Tertiary lymph nodes (TLN) were scored using H&E slides from our patient tumor samples (Supplementary Data 1). TLN scoring was 0—no TLN identified, 1—few TLN identified, 2—many TLN identified, 3—a single outlier sample with so many TLN that it was given its own score.
CD20 Immunohistochemistry assays (IHC) were run on the automated Ventana Discovery XT platform (Supplementary Data 1). Anti-CD20 (Ventana 760–2531), a mouse monoclonal (L26) was used at predilute concentration (0.3 μg/ml) with Cell Conditioning 1 solution for antigen retrieval along with a heated 16 min primary incubation. OmniMap anti-Ms-HRP for 16 min was used for secondary incubation. Slides were counterstained with Ventana hematoxylin (760–2021) and Bluing Reagent (760–2037) for 4 min each. Ventana Ms IgG (760–2014) was used as the mouse IgG control and run under same conditions. Human tonsil tissue sections were used as both a positive and Ms IgG control.
CD8/CD33 was run as dual IHC stain on the automated Ventana Discovery XT platform (Supplementary Data 1). Anti-CD8 (Ventana 790–4460, predilute, 0.3 ug/ml) a rabbit monoclonal (SP57) was diluted 1:15 with Dako antibody diluent (S0809) to a final concentration of 0.02 ug/ml and anti-CD33 (Leica PA0555, predilute, 10 mg/ml), a mouse monoclonal (PWS44). The combined antibodies used Cell Conditioning 1 for antigen retrieval and a primary antibody heated incubation time of 40 min. Anti-CD8 was visualized using OmniMap DAB and anti-CD33 was stained with Ultra Map-Red. OmniMap DAB secondary incubations were reacted for 4 min while UltraMap Red for 16 min. Ventana (Rb IgG) (760–1029) was used as the rabbit IgG control and Ventana (Ms IgG) (760–2014) was used as the mouse IgG control and run under same conditions. Human tonsil tissue sections were used as the positive control for CD8/CD33 staining.
The scoring of CD33+ intratumoral neutrophils (T-CD-33); and CD33+ stromal neutrophils (S-CD-33) were based on criteria for semiquantitative assessment of TILs, described by Schalper et al. (Supplementary Data 1). A score of 0 indicated the virtual absence of positive neutrophils in evaluation of either T-CD-33 or S-CD-33; a score of 1+ indicated a relatively low amount of T-CD-33 compared against all nucleated cells in the tumor area or of S-CD-33 compared against all nucleated cells in the stromal area (<30%); a score of 2+ corresponded with a relatively moderate amount of positive neutrophils (30–60%); and a score of 3+ corresponded with a high amount of CD33+ neutrophils (>60%).
Reporting summary
Further information on research design is available in the Nature Research Reporting Summary linked to this article.