ABSTRACT:
Background
Proteomic analyses of clinical specimens often rely on human tissues preserved through formalin-fixation and paraffin embedding (FFPE). Minimal sample consumption is the key to preserve the integrity of pathological archives but also to deal with minimal invasive core biopsies. This has been achieved by using the acid-labile surfactant RapiGest in combination with a direct trypsinization (DTR) strategy. A critical comparison of the DTR protocol with the most commonly used filter aided sample preparation (FASP) protocol is lacking. Furthermore, it is unknown how common histological stainings influence the outcome of the DTR protocol.
Methods
Four single consecutive murine kidney tissue specimens were prepared with the DTR approach or with the FASP protocol using both 10 and 30 k filter devices and analyzed by label-free, quantitative liquid chromatography–tandem mass spectrometry (LC–MS/MS). We compared the different protocols in terms of proteome coverage, relative label-free quantitation, missed cleavages, physicochemical properties and gene ontology term annotations of the proteins. Additionally, we probed compatibility of the DTR protocol for the analysis of common used histological stainings, namely hematoxylin & eosin (H&E), hematoxylin and hemalaun. These were proteomically compared to an unstained control by analyzing four human tonsil FFPE tissue specimens per condition.
Results
On average, the DTR protocol identified 1841 ± 22 proteins in a single, non-fractionated LC–MS/MS analysis, whereas these numbers were 1857 ± 120 and 1970 ± 28 proteins for the FASP 10 and 30 k protocol. The DTR protocol showed 15% more missed cleavages, which did not adversely affect quantitation and intersample comparability. Hematoxylin or hemalaun staining did not adversely impact the performance of the DTR protocol. A minor perturbation was observed for H&E staining, decreasing overall protein identification by 13%.
Conclusions
In essence, the DTR protocol can keep up with the FASP protocol in terms of qualitative and quantitative reproducibility and performed almost as well in terms of proteome coverage and missed cleavages. We highlight the suitability of the DTR protocol as a viable and straightforward alternative to the FASP protocol for proteomics-based clinical research.
Electronic supplementary material
The online version of this article (10.1186/s12014-018-9188-y) contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.
METHODS:
Methods
FFPE mouse kidney samples
Maintenance of animal strains and work performed in this study was carried out in accordance with institutional guidelines and the German law for animal protection (Tierschutzgesetz) as published on May 18th 2006 with last amendment on July 28th 2014. Ethics approval registration number is G14/18 RP regional council Freiburg. Kidneys of a male, 6-months old C57 black 6 mouse lacking cathepsin L (Ctsl−/−) were removed immediately after sacrificing it. Formalin fixation and paraffin embedding were performed as described previously. 10 µm thick sections were sliced from one kidney FFPE tissue block using a microtome and mounted onto glass slides. Deparaffinization was performed by immersing the glass slides with the tissues three times 5 min into xylol. For rehydration the tissue was incubated for two times 5 min in 99% ethanol, following 20 s in 99, 96, 70 and 50% ethanol. The tissues were stored in distilled water until further proceeding. Twelve single kidney tissue slices with a tissue area of around 60 mm2, were transferred into separate reaction tubes and used as replicates for each of the three protocols (DTR, FASP 10 k, FASP 30 k).
FFPE human tonsil samples
Patient consent was obtained from each patient before inclusion into this study. Tonsils were treated with formalin directly after surgical removal and embedded in paraffin as described previously. 5 µm thick sections from two FFPE tonsil tissue blocks were sliced with a microtome and mounted onto glass slides. Deparaffinization and rehydration was performed according to a standard protocol. For each tonsil, adjacent tissue slices were stained with hematoxylin, H&E, hemalaun or left unstained as control. For the hematoxylin staining the tissues were incubated for 4 min in hematoxylin solution modified acc. to Gill III and afterwards shortly washed with acetic acid in aqueous solution and furthermore, rinsed with water for about 5 min. The same procedure was performed for the H&E staining but afterwards the tissue was incubated in eosin for 1 min and rinsed again with water. Hemalaun staining was performed by immersing the tissue in Mayer’s acid Hemalaun solution for 1 min and rinse it with water for about 5 min.
The tissues were stored in distilled water until further proceeding. The 16 single deparaffinized and dehydrated tissue slices were transferred into separate reaction tubes with a scalpel. The tissue area for tonsil 1 was 118 mm2, for tonsil 2 93 mm2.
Direct tissue trypsinization using a RapiGest containing buffer (DTR)
The sample preparation steps for the DTR protocol are shown in Fig. 1. 100 µl (200 µl for the tonsil samples) of an aqueous buffer containing 0.1% RapiGest SF (Waters, Milford, MA, USA), 0.1 M HEPES pH 8 (AppliChem, Darmstadt, Germany) and 1 mM dithiothreitol (DTT) (AppliChem, Darmstadt, Germany) were added to each reaction tube, containing a single tissue slice. The buffered samples were incubated in a thermo shaker (TS1 ThermoShaker, Biometra, Göttingen, Germany) at 95 °C and 750 rpm for 4 h to perform heat induced antigen retrieval and protein extraction. The tonsil tissue was further homogenized in a biorupter (Diagenode) for 10 cycles (5 s on, 10 s off). The pH of each sample was checked and if necessary adjusted to pH 7–8. Sequencing grade trypsin (Worthington, Lakewood, NJ, USA) was added in a ratio of at least 2 µg per mm3 tissue. For trypsinization, the sample was incubated at 37 °C over night. In order to remove potential cell debris the samples were centrifuged at 19,000g for 15 min. Additional centrifugation was performed when cell debris were still present in the supernatant. The supernatant was transferred into a new reaction tube. If required, 2 × 5 µl were used to estimate the peptide concentration in the sample with the Pierce BCA protein assay kit (Thermo Scientific, Rockford, USA). The cysteine residues of the peptides in the supernatant were then reduced and alkylated by incubation in 10 mM DTT for 15 min at 37 °C, followed by 30 mM iodacetamide (Sigma-Aldrich, St. Louis, USA) for 15 min at 37 °C and again 10 mM DTT for 15 min at 37 °C. For RapiGest removal the samples were brought to a final concentration of 3 M guanidinium chloride (AppliChem, Darmstadt, Germany), acidified (pH < 3) with hydrochloric acid (Merck, Darmstadt, Germany) and incubated for at least 30 min at 37 °C. Any precipitate was removed by centrifugation at 19,000g for 10 min. 15 µg of peptides per sample were desalted using self-packed C18 STAGE tips (Empore, St. Paul, MN, USA). BCA assay was performed and 3 µg peptides per sample were vacuum dried in a centrifugal vacuum concentrator (Eppendorf, Hamburg, Germany) and stored at − 80 °C until measured by LC–MS/MS. 
Filter aided sample preparation (FASP)
Sample preparation was performed according to previously published protocols with minor adaptations. The workflow is depicted in Fig. 1. 10 and 30 k filter units were used for two independent FASP approaches called FASP 10 k and FASP 30 k, respectively. Heat induced antigen retrieval and protein extraction were achieved by boiling the kidney tissues in 100 µl of an aqueous buffer containing 4% sodium dodecyl sulfate (SDS) (Serva Electrophoresis GmbH, Heidelberg), 0.1 M Tris–HCl pH 7.6 and 0.1 M DTT for 4 h at 95 °C and 750 rpm. In order to remove SDS, the lysate was added to ultrafiltration devices (Microcon Ultracel YM-10 and YM-30 filtration devices, Merck Millipore, Darmstadt, Germany) which were pre-filled with 100 µl of freshly prepared 8 M urea buffer.
The SDS removal was performed as described in Nature protocols. Trypsin digestion was performed by adding 40 µl ammonium bicarbonate buffer containing 2 µg sequencing grade trypsin (Worthington, Lakewood, NJ, USA). After digestion the peptides were eluted twice, using 40 µl ammonium bicarbonate by centrifugation at 14,000g for 15 min. The peptide concentration was estimated by using the Pierce BCA protein assay kit in triplicates. 12 µg of peptides were acidified with trifluoroacetic acid and desalted using self-packed C18 STAGE tips (Empore, St. Paul, MN, USA). Eluted peptide amounts were measured by BCA assay and 3 µg were vacuum dried in a centrifugal vacuum concentrator (Eppendorf, Hamburg, Germany) and stored at − 80 °C until measured by LC–MS/MS.
LC–MS/MS analysis
Vacuum dried samples were dissolved in 40 µl aqueous buffer containing 2% acetonitrile and 0.3% acetic acid, sonicated for 5 min and transferred to the measurement tubes. 5 µl of each sample were analyzed by an Orbitrap Q-Exactive plus (Thermo Scientific) mass spectrometer coupled to an Easy nanoLC 1000 (Thermo Scientific) with a flow rate of 300 nl/min. Buffer A contained 0.3% (v/v) acetic acid and buffer B 0.3% (v/v) acetic acid in 80% acetonitrile. They were applied with an increasing gradient of acetonitrile over time (0–60% (v/v) acetonitrile in 90 min) in order to separate the peptides on the analytical column [Acclaim PepMap column (Thermo Scientific)], 2 µm particle size, 100 Å pore size, length 150 mm, inner diameter 50 µm). The MS was operated in data dependent mode and each MS scan was followed by a maximum of ten MS/MS scans. The mass range from 300 to 2000 Dalton was analyzed.
Data analysis
MaxQuant (V1.5.2.8) software was used for data analysis. Peptide identification was performed with the Andromeda search engine using human or mouse proteome databases containing reviewed Uniprot sequences without isoforms downloaded from Uniprot on 18th May 2015 (mouse, 16,711 entries) and 15th April 2016 (human, 20,193 entries). Decoys for the database search were generated with the revert function. The precursor mass tolerance for the initial search was 20 ppm and for the main search 4.5 ppm whereas the fragment mass tolerance was 20 ppm. Tryptic cleavage specificity with two missed cleavages was applied, minimal peptide length was set to seven amino acids and I = L was enabled. Carbamidomethyl at cysteines was the only fixed modification. The false discovery rate (FDR) for peptides and proteins was set to 0.01. Label-free quantitation (LFQ) on at least one peptide per protein was performed using the MaxLFQ algorithm and the re-quantify function. The MaxQuant output was further processed in R (V3.3.1) with RStudio as an integrated development environment. Reverse and potential contaminant entries were removed. LFQ intensities were log2 transformed for plotting intensity distribution and calculating the Pearson correlation coefficient. Functional classification of the identified proteins was performed with PANTHER (V11.1). The open, web-based platform galaxy was used to calculate the identified proteins’ molecular weight, isoelectric point and gravy score with biopython as well as potential transmembrane domains with a hidden markov model. In case of peptides containing selenocysteine the single amino acid “U” was deleted in order to obtain a gravy score. In three replicates, there was one peptide containing three “B” and two “Z” amino acids, in both cases the values for the acid counterpart (“D”, “E”) were considered for the calculation of the protein properties. Biovenn was used for Venn diagrams.