ABSTRACT:
The diffuse-type gastric cancer (DGC) is a subtype of gastric cancer with the worst prognosis and few treatment options. Here we present a dataset from 84 DGC patients, composed of a proteome of 11,340 gene products and mutation information of 274 cancer driver genes covering paired tumor and nearby tissue. DGC can be classified into three subtypes (PX1–3) based on the altered proteome alone. PX1 and PX2 exhibit dysregulation in the cell cycle and PX2 features an additional EMT process; PX3 is enriched in immune response proteins, has the worst survival, and is insensitive to chemotherapy. Data analysis revealed four major vulnerabilities in DGC that may be targeted for treatment, and allowed the nomination of potential immunotherapy targets for DGC patients, particularly for those in PX3. This dataset provides a rich resource for information and knowledge mining toward altered signaling pathways in DGC and demonstrates the benefit of proteomic analysis in cancer molecular subtyping.
Diffuse-type gastric cancer (DGC) accounts for 30% of gastric cancers and has few treatment options. Here the authors present a mutation and proteome dataset for 84 patients, identifying three major classes of DGC and indicating potential targets for therapy.
METHODS:
Methods
Biospecimen collection and pathology and clinical data
We screened 2451 gastric cancer patients who took total or subtotal gastrectomy at Beijing Cancer Hospital, Beijing, China (from December 2012 to July 2015), and selected 146 cases of DGC. Among the excluded 2305 patients, 428 were treated with neoadjuvant chemotherapy or chemo-radiation therapy before operation, 92 were diagnosed with gastrointestinal stromal tumors, 751 were intestinal-type gastric cancer, 644 were mixed-type gastric cancer, and 390 did not have enough tumor tissues or nearby gastric tissues. All cases were staged according to the seventh edition of American Joint Committee on Cancer (AJCC) staging system. Each specimen was collected within 30 min after operation, cleaned with sterile towel, immediately transferred into sterile freezing vials and immersed in liquid nitrogen, then stored at −80 °C until use. The protocol was approved by Beijing Cancer Hospital Medical Research Ethics Committee (2015KT70). We collected written informed consent from all participating patients.
Tumors and their nearby tissues were evaluated by pathologists. Nearby tissues were designated as non-cancerous and were greater than 5 cm away from the surgery margin. Each specimen was cut into four pieces under −40 °C. One was formalin fixed and paraffin embedded for pathology examination; one was used for protein profiling, one was used for DNA sequencing, and one was stored for future use. H&E-stained sections were examined by two expert gastrointestinal pathologists (Z.L. and Yumei Lai) independently to confirm: (1) diffuse type (Lauren type); (2) >50% tumor cell nuclei; (3) <20% necrosis in tumor tissue; (4) no tumor cells in nearby tissue (Supplementary Data 1). Mesenchymal percentage, normal cell percentage, signet ring cell proportion, lymphovascular invasion, and nearby tissue status (superficial gastritis, atrophic gastritis, intestinal metaplasia or dysplasia) were also determined. Among the 146 pairs of DGC samples, 56 did not pass the criteria due to less than 50% of tumor cells in tumor tissue, 3 failed because nearby tissue contained tumor cells, and 1 failed because of muscle layer tissue in nearby tissue. An additional two patients were excluded because gastric cancer was diagnosed as second primary tumor after lung cancer. Specimens in dry ice were transferred to Beijing Proteome Research Center within 3 h after surgery. The remaining 84 diffuse type were processed for proteome profiling, and 83 were processed for targeted sequencing, except for one patient due to low DNA quality. All except 2 patients (GC055 and GC096) received follow-up every 6 months from the date of surgery.
Demographics, histopathologic information, family history of cancer, primary tumor location, first recurrent site, treatment details including chemotherapy drugs, doses and routes of administration, and outcome parameters were collected. The date of operation was used as a surrogate for the date of initial diagnosis. OS was defined as the interval between the date of initial surgical resection to the date of last known contact or death. Disease-free survival was defined as the interval between the date of initial surgical resection to the date of progression or to the last follow-up date. The date of progression was defined as the date of documented recurrences by imaging evidence (computed tomography, magnetic resonance imaging, or positron emission tomography). With or without chemotherapy in this research was defined as with or without at least one cycle of adjuvant chemotherapy.
Immunohistochemistry staining and evaluation
IHC for MLH1, PMS2, MSH2, and MSH6 was performed as previously described to determine microsatellite stability status. Monoclonal antibodies used were as follows: MLH1 (Clone ES05, DAKO), PMS2 (Clone EP51, DAKO), MSH2 (Clone FE11, DAKO), and MSH6 (EP49, DAKO). IHC staining was evaluated as negative when all the tumor cells showed loss of nuclear staining; tumors with one negative staining of these four markers were considered as low level of microsatellite instable (MSI-L); tumors with two or more negative staining of these four markers were considered as high level of microsatellite instable (MSI-H); tumors with all 4 positive staining were defined as MSS.
IHC staining of CD8 (Clone SP16, ZSGB-BIO) were annotated within intratumoral areas; CD8+ density was quantified using Aperio Scanscope (Aperio Technologies Vista, CA, USA) by the method of rare event tissue test. The total number of CD8+ cells in each tumor area was counted based on six random captured visual fields (400×400 m2), and the density of CD8+ T cells was defined as the total cell number per square millimeter.
IHC staining of IDO (Clone D5J4E, CST) was scored numerically on the intensity of IDO cytoplasmic staining (−, +, ++, +++) and percent tumor cells staining positive (−: 0%, +: 1–33%, ++: 34–66%, +++: ≥66%). All scoring was performed by two independent expert gastrointestinal pathologists (Z.L. and Yumei Lai), who were blind to clinical outcomes or proteomic cluster results.
EBV infection status
Chromogenic in situ hybridization with EBV-encoded small RNA (EBER) was performed to detect EBV infection using fluorescein-labeled oligonucleotide probes (INFORMEBER Probe; Ventana). Specimen in which EBER nuclear expression was observed in >20% of the tumor cells were considered EBER positive.
Protein extraction and trypsin digestion
Samples were minced and lysed in lysis buffer (8 M Urea, 100 mM Tris Hydrochloride, pH 8.0) containing protease and phosphatase Inhibitors (Thermo Scientific) followed by 1 min of sonication (3 s on and 3 s off, amplitude 25%). The lysate was centrifuged at 14,000×g for 10 min and the supernatant was collected as whole tissue extract. Protein concentration was determined by Bradford protein assay. Extracts from each sample (100 μg protein) was reduced with 10 mM dithiothreitol at 56 °C for 30 min and alkylated with 10 mM iodoacetamide at room temperature in the dark for additional 30 min. Samples were then digested using the FASP method with trypsin; tryptic peptides were separated in a home-made reverse-phase C18 column in a pipet tip. Peptides were eluted and separated into nine fractions using a stepwise gradient of increasing acetonitrile (6%, 9%, 12%, 15%, 18%, 21%, 25%, 30%, and 35%) at pH 10. The nine fractions were combined to six fractions, dried in a vacuum concentrator (Thermo Scientific), and then analyzed by liquid chromatography tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS).
LC-MS/MS analysis
Samples were analyzed on Orbitrap Fusion, Orbitrap Fusion Lumos, and Q Exactive Plus mass spectrometers (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Rockford, IL, USA) coupled with an Easy-nLC 1000 nanoflow LC system (Thermo Fisher Scientific), or a Q Exactive HF mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Rockford, IL, USA) connected to an UltiMate 3000 RSLCnano System (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Dried peptide samples were re-dissolved in Solvent A (0.1% formic acid in water) and loaded to a trap column (100 μm × 2 cm, home-made; particle size, 3 μm; pore size, 120 Å; SunChrom, USA) with a max pressure of 280 bar using Solvent A, then separated on a home-made 150 μm × 12 cm silica microcolumn (particle size, 1.9 μm; pore size, 120 Å; SunChrom, USA) with a gradient of 5–35% mobile phase B (acetonitrile and 0.1% formic acid) at a flow rate of 600 nl/min for 75 min. The MS analysis for QE HF and QE Plus were performed with one full scan (300–1400 m/z, R = 60,000 at 200 m/z) at automatic gain control target of 3e6 ions, followed by up to 20 data-dependent MS/MS scans with higher-energy collision dissociation (target 2 × 103 ions, max injection time 40 ms, isolation window 1.6 m/z, normalized collision energy of 27%), detected in the Orbitrap (R = 15,000 at 200 m/z).
For detection with Fusion or Fusion Lumos mass spectrometry, a precursor scan was carried out in the Orbitrap by scanning m/z 300−1400 with a resolution of 120,000 at 200 m/z. The most intense ions selected under top-speed mode were isolated in Quadrupole with a 1.6 m/zwindow and fragmented by higher energy collisional dissociation (HCD) with normalized collision energy of 35%, then measured in the linear ion trap using the rapid ion trap scan rate. Automatic gain control targets were 5 × 105 ions with a max injection time of 50 ms for full scans and 5 × 103 with 35 ms for MS/MS scans. Dynamic exclusion time was set as 18 s. Data were acquired using the Xcalibur software (Thermo Scientific).
Peptide identification and protein quantification
Raw files were searched against the human National Center for Biotechnology Information (NCBI) Refseq protein database (updated on 04-07-2013, 32,015 entries) by Mascot 2.3 (Matrix Science Inc) implemented on Proteome Discoverer 1.4 (Thermo Scientific). The mass tolerances were 20 ppm for precursor and 50 mmu for product ions from Q Exactive Plus and Q-Exactive HF, and 20 ppm for precursor and 0.5 Da for product ions for Fusion and Q-Exactive HF, respectively. Up to two missed cleavages were allowed. The search engine set cysteine carbamidomethylation as a fixed modification and N-acetylation, oxidation of methionine as variable modifications. Precursor ion score charges were limited to +2, +3, and +4. The data were also searched against a decoy database so that protein identifications were accepted at a false discovery rate of 1%. Label-free protein quantifications were calculated using a label-free, intensity-based absolute quantification (iBAQ) approach.
Proteins with at least 2 unique peptides with 1% FDR at the peptide level and Mascot ion score greater than 20 were selected for further analysis. Among all 11,340 proteins of this proteomics dataset, 9186 proteins met this requirement. The FOT was used to represent the normalized abundance of a particular protein across samples. FOT was defined as a protein’s iBAQ divided by the total iBAQ of all identified proteins within one sample. The FOT was multiplied by 105 for the ease of presentation (Supplementary Data 2). We analyzed the 1008 (168 × 6) raw files together for uniformed quality control and protein identification with 1% global protein FDR. The file used for protein inference and protein FDR calculation was derived from Mascot search results, and the peptide spectrum match (PSM) was filtered via Percolator and customized parameters, and then the proteins were assembled. The protein FDR was calculated depending on the ratio of NPD (the number of assembled proteins from decoy database searches) and NPT (the number of assembled proteins from target database searches). In this dataset, the FDR of PSMs was 0.08% and FDR of peptide was 0.09%.
MS Platform QC and DGC proteome QA
For quality control (QC) of the MS performance, tryptic digestions of the 293T cell lysate were measured as QC standard every 2 days. The QC standard was made and run using the same method and conditions and same software and parameters for GC. Pairwise Spearman’s correlation coefficient was calculated for all QC runs and the results are shown in Supplementary Fig. 2a. The average correlation coefficient among standards was 0.86 with the maximum and minimum of 0.99 and 0.76, respectively. The log10 transformed FOTs for each GC sample (Supplementary Fig. 2b) were plotted to show consistency of data quality.
Proteome data filtering and missing data imputation
The following filter criteria were applied for each statistical analysis shown in Fig. 1a. (1) Dataset 1 (D1) included all 11,340 identified GPs on 1% of global FDR. (2) For dataset 2 (D2), proteins were required to have at least 2 unique peptides with 1% FDR at the peptide level and Mascot ion score greater than 20. Subcellular localization, molecular function type, and target drug(s) were annotated using Ingenuity® Pathway Analysis (IPA®, QIAGEN). (3) For dataset 3 (D3), we excluded keratins and proteins whose maximum FOT in all 168 experiments were less than 10−5 in FOT, which was chosen as the minimum value according to Supplementary Fig. 3a and 3b. (4) For dataset 4 (D4), proteins were required to be identified in at least one-sixth (28) of all samples (either tumor or nearby tissue). (5) For dataset 5 (D5), the FOTs of all proteins whose FOT values were less than 10−5 were replaced with 10−5 to adjust extremely small values, and calculated the log 10 of tumor-nearby ratios. (6) For dataset (D6), proteins were required to have T/N ratio larger than 3 or less than 1/3, in at least 1/10 of patients (8 patients).
Proteome data analysis
PCA was performed to visualize separation of tumors and nearby tissues (Jolliffe 2002). SAM (samr R package) was performed to find differentially expressed proteins between tumors and paired nearby tissues of all 84 patients and within each clusters (Supplementary Data 3). Other than the annotations mentioned above, we added target drug results from The Drug Gene Interaction Database (DGIdb 2.0), stomach-related specific expressed type, and tissue from tissue-based human proteome map. Data type was set as two class paired, not centered array data for SAM; delta value was set respectively to meet FDR <0.01. The differentially expressed genes defined here must meet the following criteria: (1) q-value less than 0.01, and (2) differentially expressed percentage larger than 50%, which was calculated using the following formula:
where  means number of patients with T/N ratio larger than 3, means number of patients with T/N ratio less than 1/3.
Fisher’s exact test was used to find enriched gene sets/pathways (including 186 Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes (KEGG) gene sets, 217 Biocarta gene sets, 674 Reactome gene sets, 196 PID gene sets and 50 cancer hallmark gene sets from MSigDB V5.1) by differentially expressed genes (Supplementary Data 4). The 9186 genes detected in D2 were used as the background.
Wilcoxon rank-sum test was used to identify proteins with significantly different expression between mutant samples and wild-type samples and was also used to compare expression of stomach-specific and not stomach-specific proteins.
For mutation altered proteome, up-regulated proteins in mutated tumor tissues are: (1) differential expressed in mutated tumors and wild-type tumors (P < 0.05, Wilcoxon rank-sum test); (2) mean value of mutated tumors/wild-type tumors >1.6. Down-regulated proteins are: (1) differential expressed in mutated tumors and wild-type tumors (P < 0.05, Wilcoxon rank-sum test); (2) mean value of mutated tumors/wild-type tumors <0.33.
Jaccard index was used to calculate similarity among altered proteomes correlated to high-frequent mutants. Jaccard index between mutation altered proteome i and proteome j was defined as , where ∩ denotes intersection between altered proteomes i and j, and ⋃ denotes union between altered proteomes iand j.
Proteome molecular subtyping of DGC
Consensus clustering was performed using the R package ConsensusClusterPlus. Samples were clustered using Euclidean distance as the distance measure. A total of 2538 proteins in D6 were used for k-means clustering with up to 6 clusters. The consensus matrices for k = 2, 3, 4 clusters are shown in Supplementary Fig. 4. The consensus matrix of k = 3 showed clear separation among clusters; the average silhouette width for k = 2, 3 (0.08) was higher than k = 4 (0.06), indicating stronger cluster separation. The cumulative distribution function (CDF) of the consensus matrix for each k-value was also measured (Supplementary Fig. 4b and 4c). Clustering by k = 3 had the lowest proportion of ambiguous clustering (PAC). The relative change in area under the CDF curve increased 30% from 2 clusters to 3 clusters, while others had no appreciable increase. Taken together, proteome clusters were defined using k-means consensus clustering with k = 3.
Survival analysis
All survival analysis used Kaplan–Meier method and the difference was tested using the log-rank test. Coefficient value, which equals to ln (HR), was calculated from Cox proportional hazards regression analysis. P-values less than 0.05 were considered as significantly different. OS was used as primary endpoint. Clinical variables analyzed with P-value less than 0.05 using single variant analysis were chosen to enter Cox regression multivariate analysis. The SPSS 22.0 software (IBM Corp.) and the R package “survival” was used for survival statistical tests.
Nomination of prognosis-related druggable candidates for DGC
We used two steps to nominate drug target candidates for DGC. First, we picked proteins that were overexpressed in tumors; second, we selected overexpressed proteins that were associated with worse OS to screen prognosis unfavorable therapeutic targets. A total of 159 genomic data discovered druggable cancer drivers/candidates were evaluated. The drugs are comprised of (1) the Food and Drug Administration (FDA)-approved drugs, including direct targeting, indirect targeting, gene therapy, strong off-target and mild off-target; (2) drug in clinical trials, including direct targeting, indirect targeting and gene therapy; (3) pre-clinical ligand; (4) potentially druggable; and (5) potentially biopharmable.
Targeted exome sequencing
A capture panel was developed, which covered coding exons and flanking splicing junctions for 274 gastric cancer driver genes (Supplementary Data 2). This gene list collected all the significantly mutated, amplified, deleted genes in gastric cancer, especially diffuse-type gastric cancer, from three model studies as well as all 138 cancer driver genes. For each pair of tumor and paired nearby samples, genomic DNA was extracted either manually or automatically using the Gentra Puregene (Qiagen). DNA concentration was measured by a NanoDrop 1000 spectrophotometer (Thermo Scientific, Wilmington, DE). Briefly, 1 μg of genomic DNA from each sample was mechanically sheared, end repaired, and ligated to molecularly bar-coded adaptors to generate sequencing libraries following the manufacturer’s standard protocol (Illumina). Co-capture was performed on pooled DNA libraries in groups of up to 48 samples. Captured sample DNA was sequenced on an Illumina HiSeq 2000 according to the standard operating protocol.
Paired-end reads in Fastq format were aligned to the reference human genome (University of California, Santa Cruz (UCSC) Genome Browser, hg19) using Burrows–Wheeler Aligner (BWA). Aligned reads were further processed following the GATK Best Practices of duplicate removal, indel realignment, and recalibration. Somatic single-nucleotide variations (SNVs) and small insertions and deletions (Indels) were detected by MuTect and Pindel, respectively. In addition, variants were filtered against the ExAC database using a cut-off of 0.1%. SNVs and Indels were annotated using SnpEff based on UCSC known genes. Of the 274 exome targeted sequencing genes, 183 met the requirements of variant allele frequency more than 0.05 in tumor tissues and less than 0.03 in paired normal tissues and were selected for further analysis. OncoPrint was used to show 39 mutant genes with nonsynonymous mutation rate higher than 5% (Fig. 1d).
Mutation mapper was used to map location and frequency of mutations for TP53, ATM, and ARID1A, for these three genes showed significantly changed protein expression after mutation (Supplementary Fig. 5a), as well as other highly mutated genes in our cohort. Genes’ mutation profile was used to generate pathways’ mutation profile in each patient. A pathway was mutated when at least one gene in the pathway was mutated. Tested pathways included all gene sets from Canonical Pathways from MSigDB V5.1.
Western blot
For each sample, 20 μg of protein extracts from the previous step (See section Protein extraction and trypsin digestion) was separated on 10% sodium dodecyl sulfate–polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis. The proteins were transferred onto nitrocellulose membranes. After blocking with 5% milk (BD Science) solution in TBST (Tris buffered saline with Tween) for 1 h, the membranes were incubated with 5% milk containing appropriate primary antibodies overnight at 4 °C followed by 2 h of incubation with horseradish peroxidase-conjugated secondary antibodies. Signals of target protein bands were detected using Chemiluminescent detection reagent. IDO1 antibody (CST #86630) and β-tubulin antibody (CW0098) were used in a 1:1000 dilution.
Data availability
The proteomics data is accessible in the PRIDE Archive under the accession number PXD008840. The targeted exome sequencing data is accessible in NCBI SRA under the accession number SRP131815.