ABSTRACT:
Schistosomiasis is a neglected parasitic disease that affects millions of people worldwide and is caused by helminth parasites from the genus Schistosoma. When caused by S. mansoni, it is associated with the development of a hepatosplenic disease caused by an intense immune response to the important antigenic contribution of adult worms and to the presence of eggs trapped in liver tissue. Although the importance of the spleen for the establishment of immune pathology is widely accepted, it has received little attention in terms of the molecular mechanisms operating in response to the infection. Here, we interrogated the spleen proteome using a label-free shotgun approach for the potential discovery of molecular mechanisms associated to the peak of the acute phase of inflammation and the development of splenomegaly in the murine model. Over fifteen hundred proteins were identified in both infected and control individuals and 325 of those proteins were differentially expressed. Two hundred and forty-two proteins were found upregulated in infected individuals while 83 were downregulated. Functional enrichment analyses for differentially expressed proteins showed that most of them were categorized within pathways of innate and adaptive immunity, DNA replication, vesicle transport and catabolic metabolism. There was an important contribution of granulocyte proteins and antigen processing and presentation pathways were augmented, with the increased expression of MHC class II molecules but the negative regulation of cysteine and serine proteases. Several proteins related to RNA processing were upregulated, including splicing factors. We also found indications of metabolic reprogramming in spleen cells with downregulation of proteins related to mitochondrial metabolism. Ex-vivo imunophenotyping of spleen cells allowed us to attribute the higher abundance of MHC II detected by mass spectrometry to increased number of macrophages (F4/80+/MHC II+ cells) in the infected condition. We believe these findings add novel insights for the understanding of the immune mechanisms associated with the establishment of schistosomiasis and the processes of immune modulation implied in the host-parasite interactions.
METHODS:
Materials and Methods
Ethics Statement
All experiments involving animals were conducted in accordance with the Brazilian Federal Legislation (Arouca's Law number 11,794), which regulates the scientific use of animals in Brazil. Both the routine methods for maintenance of the S. mansoni life cycle and the experimental procedures involving mice were reviewed and approved by the local Ethics Committee on Animal Experimentation ‘Comissão de Ética no Uso de Animais’ (CEUA), Universidade Federal de Ouro Preto (UFOP), and received the protocol numbers 2017/34 and 2017/35, respectively.
Infection Model and Experimental Design
The murine model of schistosomiasis was established as follows. Twenty-three female Balb/c mice aged 30 days were anesthetized using a combination of ketamine hydrochloride (8 mg/kg) and xylazine (4 mg/kg) administered via intraperitoneal injection. Continuing, the animals were infected by S. mansoni larvae (LE strain) through tail immersion, with a dose of 200 cercariae/animal (Infected group). Control groups were established with 18 non-infected individuals of the same age as those in the Infected group. After 7 weeks of infection, both Infected and Control individuals were weighted and sacrificed using anesthetic overdose. Spleens were weighted to calculate the spleen-to-body ratio as a measure of splenomegaly and then washed and maintained in 2 mL of ice-cold RPMI media for further treatments. Fifteen spleens from infected individuals and thirteen from control were used in the two independent flow cytometry experiments. Eight spleens from Infected individuals and five from Controls were used for histology and mass spectrometry analyses. Tissue sections of approximately 0.5 cm2 were collected from these last organs and stored in 3.7% buffered-formalin (pH 7.2) for histological analyses (Supplementary Figure 1).
Characterization of Schistosome Induced Splenomegaly
To corroborate the establishment of splenomegaly in the mouse model of schistosomiasis, the percentage ratio spleen-to-body weight was calculated as suggested by Henderson et al.. Histological analyses were also performed. After fixing in 3.7% buffered-formalin (pH 7.2), spleen sections were embedded in paraffin and tissue sections of approximately 4 μm thick were obtained using a microtome. Then, the slides were stained with hematoxylin & eosin (HE) and Masson's Trichrome, and evaluated for morphological differences between Infected and Control individuals. The presence of S. mansoni eggs within stool samples of infected individuals was assessed via the method of spontaneous sedimentation, considering the presence of one egg as confirmatory of infection.
Isolation of Spleen Cells
After extraction, spleens were transferred to a 2 mL bounce glass tissue grinder with 2 mL of RPMI media. The organs were homogenized after 3–4 strokes of the pestle and cells in suspension were then transferred using a Pasteur pipette to a 15 mL tube. Cells were pelleted by centrifugation at 210 g for 10min at 4°C in swing bucket rotor. Splenocytes were then resuspended in 5 mL of lysis buffer (Tris-Base 0.206% w/v, NH4Cl 0.77% w/v, pH 7.2) and maintained ice-cold for 2min, in order to promote the lysis of red cells. The lysis was stopped by isotonifying the media after adding 10 mL of PBS (0.1 M, pH 7.2-7.4) and pelleted by centrifugation. Subsequently, isolated spleen cells were washed twice with PBS to eliminate the excess of lysis buffer and stored at −20°C.
Protein Extraction and Sample Preparation
The isolated spleen cells were resuspended in ammonium bicarbonate buffer (25 mM, pH 8.3), supplemented with 1% protease inhibitor cocktail (PIC, Sigma Aldrich, St. Louis, MO, USA) and then homogenized for 2min by using a tight-fitting Teflon pestle attached to a power drill (Potter S, Braum Biotech International, Melsungen, Germany) set to 1,000 rpm. After homogenization, the samples were transferred to fresh mini-tubes (Axygen, Union City, CA, USA) and stored at −20°C to be used as particulated protein extracts. The protein concentration of each sample was measured on microplates, using the Pierce BCA protein assay kit (Thermo Scientific, Cramlington, UK).
In Solution Digestion
Three biological replicates were prepared for each group, using 30 μg aliquot from pooled extracts of five animals. Protein extracts were reduced and alkylated before digestion with MS grade trypsin (Promega, Madison, WI, USA) in the presence of the digestion enhancer RapiGest (Waters, UK). Briefly, samples were added with RapiGest to a final concentration of (0.06% w/v) and incubated at 80°C for 10min. Then, proteins were reduced using dithiothreitol (Sigma Aldrich, St. Louis, MO, USA) to a final concentration of 3.3 mM at 60°C for 10min. Alkylation was achieved using iodoacetamide (GE Healthcare, Little Chalfont, Buckinghamshire, UK) to a final concentration of 9.4 mM at room temperature in the dark, for 30min. Samples were digested using sequencing grade trypsin at a ratio of 50:1 (protein/trypsin) and incubated at 37°C for 16 h. To stop the digestion and precipitate RapiGest, trifluoroacetic acid was added to a final concentration of 0.5% v/v, resulting in a pH ≤ 2. After that, a centrifugation step was performed at 20,000 g for 15min at 7°C (Mikro 200R, Hettich Zentrifugen, Tuttlingen, DEU) for the removal of insoluble particles.
Liquid Chromatography–Mass Spectrometry
After digestion, 0.5 μg of peptide samples solubilized in 2% acetonitrile-0.1% trifluoroacetic acid solution (TFA, Sigma Aldrich, St. Louis, MO, USA) were injected into the nanoUHPLC UltiMate® 3,000 (Dionex, San Jose, USA) system. In first instance, peptides were trapped on a Nano-Trap Acclaim PepMap100 C18 column (100 μm i.d. × 2 cm, 5 μm, 100 Å; Thermo Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA) and washed for 3min in 2% acetonitrile (ACN, HPLC grade, USE)/water/0.1% TFA solution, at a flow rate of 7 μL/min. After that, a reverse phase chromatography was performed using an Acclaim PepMap18 RSLC (75 μm i.d. × 15 cm, 2 μm, 100 Å; Thermo Scientific) column (in tandem with the previously mentioned column), maintained at 40°C with a constant flow rate of 0.3 μL/min. Following, a multistep gradient of solvents A (0.1% Formic Acid, HPLC grade, JTBaker, Mexico) and B (80% ACN, 0.1% Formic Acid) was executed as follows: a conditioning step with 3.8% of B was applied on the first 3min, followed by a ramp from 3.8 to 30% B over 120min and 30–50% B between 120 and 150min, with a final ramp with 99% B to 162min and a reconditioning step with 3.8% B until 180min.
The spectral data was acquired using a Q Exactive mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific®, Bremen, Germany) operating at full-scan/MS2 mode. The ion source was set at 3.8 kV with a capillary temperature of 250°C. The acquisition method for the survey scans was tuned for a resolution of 70,000 at m/z 200, with a mass range between 300 and 2,000 m/z, and a AGC target of 1e6 ions in up to 120 ms. For MS/MS acquisitions, a Top 12 criteria was used, isolating up to 12 most intense precursors ions with charge state between +2 and +4 from a 1.2 m/z window, excluding isotopes. Selected ions were fragmented by Higher Energy Collision Induced Dissociation (HCD) with a stepped Normalized Collisional Energy (NCE) of 28–30. After collision, the product ion spectra were acquired with a resolution of 17,500 with a maximum injection time of 60 ms and a target value of 5e5 (minimum AGC target 6.25e3) and a Dynamic exclusion time of 40 s.
Analysis of Proteomic Data
After gathering the spectral data, it was submitted to database search for protein identification and quantification using Patternlab for protemics software (version 4.1.0.6). The Uniprot sequence database from Mus musculus (59,517 total sequences) was downloaded and later processed to include also reverse sequences of each protein (labeled as decoy) resulting in a mixed target-decoy database (eliminating subset sequences) which was used as background for the identification algorithm. For spectrum match search, the Comet algorithm was used to compare the experimental tandem mass spectra against those theoretical spectra generated from target and decoy sequences. The parameters applied to establish the theoretical spectra were generated from an in silico digestion of the protein database, which was set to mimic a semi-specific tryptic digestion with up to 2 missed cleavage sites, including cysteine carbamidomethylation (+57.02146 Da) as fixed and methionine oxidation (+15.9949 Da) as variable post-translational modifications (up to 3 variable modifications for peptide), a mass range MS1 precursor peptide of 550–5,500 Da with a mass tolerance error of 10 ppm and considering MS2 ions from B, Y and neutral loss fragmentation. This resulted in a list of candidates for each spectrum, which was later filtered using the Search Engine Processor (SEPro). In this step, pre-processing quality filters were applied as follows: delta mass of 30 ppm, a total DeltaCN of 0.001 and at least 6 amino acids on peptide sequence and post-processing quality filters applying to accept only proteins that have at least 1 peptide, 1 spectral count, PSM with a delta mass of 10 ppm from the average delta mass obtained and a Normalized primary score (XCorr) of at least 2.0 for proteins identified with only 1 mass spectrum and at least 1.8 for proteins identified with at least 2 mass spectra. Identifications were grouped by number of enzymatic termini and a Bayesian score, which included XCorr, delta CN, peaks matched values, delta mass error, spectral count score and secondary rank, was used to sort the identification in a non-decreasing order of confidence. Later, a cutoff score was applied to accept a false-discovery rate (FDR) of 3% for spectra, 2% for peptide and 1% for protein identification based on the number of labeled decoys into the identification list.
Quantification was based on the number of peptide spectral counts, normalized using the spectral abundance factor (NSAF). The relative quantification of proteins was performed using the TFold method, setting the F-stringency to 0.03 and the L-stringency to 0.4. The BH q-value threshold for the significance test was set to 0.05. These parameters were set to reach a fold-change threshold of ~1.2 and a p-value of 0.05, as the criteria to consider proteins as differentially expressed. The whole quantitative data, along with the set of differentially expressed proteins, was exported into a CSV file for enrichment analysis and data visualization using the R programming language (version 3.5.1) running on R Studio (version 1.1.442). The reproducibility of the protein quantifications was evaluated through the Pearson's correlation test between each biological replicate (Supplementary Figure 2).
Enrichment analysis based on Reactome categories was performed using the package “ReactomePA” and the package “clusterProfiler” was used for the categorization based on KEGG pathways. The hypergeometric model was used as the statistical method for enrichment and categorization. All categories with a geneset size between 100 and 1,000 were tested, with a significance threshold per enriched category set to P ≤ 0.05 with FDR adjustment. For the visualization of the functional enrichment results, both the “enrichplot” and “pathview” packages were used.
Ex-vivo Immunophenotyping of Splenocytes
Fifteen infected mice and 13 controls were used for immunophenotyping via flow cytometry experiments. After isolation (see Isolation of Spleen Cells), spleen cells were counted and resuspended at a concentration of 1 × 107/mL. Then, a total of 5×105 splenocytes were transferred to fresh polystyrene tubes in the presence of 0.5 μg IgG anti-Fc receptors CD32 and CD16 and incubated for 5min at room temperature. Cells were then incubated with the diluted anti-mouse cell surface monoclonal antibody (mAb) for 30min, at room temperature (RT), in the dark. The following mAbs were used: 0.25 μg of anti-CD3ε (PE, clone 145-2C11, BioLegend); 0.025 μg of anti-CD4 (FITC, clone FM4-5, BioLegend); 0.125 μg of anti-CD8 (PE-Cy7, clone 53-6.7, BD Pharmigen); 0.1 μg of anti-F4/80 (PE, clone BM8, BioLegend); 0.03 μg of anti-MHC II (Alexa Fluor 647, clone M5/114.15.2) and 0.5 μg of anti-CD11c (PE-Cy7, clone HL3, BD Pharmingen). The splenocytes were then washed in PBS pH 7.2 and centrifuged at 400 g for 10min at RT. Then, the labeled cells were fixed for 30min at RT, with 200 μL of FACS fix solution (10 g/L paraformaldehyde, 1% sodium cacodylate, 6.67 g/L sodium chloride, pH 7.2). The staining was performed in two different tubes with the respective panels of mAbs: (1) CD3-PE, CD4-FITC and CD8-PECy7–to measure the frequencies of subpopulations of T lymphocytes and (2) F4/80-PE, CD11c-PECy7 and MHC-II-AF647–to analyze the subpopulations of antigen-presenting cells (macrophages and dendritic cells) expressing MHC-II. The data were collected using a flow cytometer FACSCalibur (Becton Dickinson, USA) and a total of 50,000 events were acquired for each tube. The Cell-Quest software package was used for data acquisition. Data analysis was performed using the FlowJo software (Tree Star, USA). Gating strategies were used according to the subpopulation of splenocytes studied and were representative of the whole population of spleen cells (Supplementary Figure 3A) and depicted by the pseudocolor bi-dimensional fluorescence graphs. For T-lymphocytes, two cell scatter plots were used by evaluating the FL2/anti-CD3 PE vs. FL1/anti-CD4 FITC and FL2/anti-CD3 PE vs. FL3/anti-CD8 PE-Cy7. The gating strategy involved identification of the double-positive quadrant representative of the CD3+/CD4+ and CD3+/CD8+ T-lymphocyte subpopulations (Supplementary Figure 3B). Antigen-presenting cells (APCs) were identified based on the expression of the membrane marker CD11c (dendritic cells) using the FL3/anti-CD11c vs. SSC (Supplementary Figure 3C) and the marker F4/80 (macrophages) using the FL2/anti-F4/80 vs. SSC (Supplementary Figure 3D). The proportion of each APC expressing MHC-II was identified based on the correspondent parent gate as illustrated in the Supplementary Figures 3C and 3D, and these proportions were extrapolated to the whole population of spleen cells (percentage of grandparent). The results were expressed as percentage of positive cells within the whole population (Supplementary Table 1). The percentages of cell populations for each sample were exported into Excel files and loaded into R for data analysis. The Shapiro-Wilk normality test was performed for each cell population under investigation. To evaluate the differences between Infected and Control individuals, the Student's t-Test was performed in cases of parametric data and the Wilcoxon test in cases of non-parametric.