ABSTRACT:
Predicting the outcome of immunotherapy treatment in melanoma patients is challenging. Alterations in genes involved in antigen presentation and the interferon gamma (IFNγ) pathway play an important role in the immune response to tumors. We describe here that the overexpression of PSMB8 and PSMB9, two major components of the immunoproteasome, is predictive of better survival and improved response to immune-checkpoint inhibitors of melanoma patients. We study the mechanism underlying this connection by analyzing the antigenic peptide repertoire of cells that overexpress these subunits using HLA peptidomics. We find a higher response of patient-matched tumor infiltrating lymphocytes against antigens diferentially presented after immunoproteasome overexpression. Importantly, we find that PSMB8 and PSMB9 expression levels are much stronger predictors of melanoma patientsʼ immune response to checkpoint inhibitors than the tumors’ mutational burden. These results suggest that PSMB8 and PSMB9 expression levels can serve as important biomarkers for stratifying melanoma patients for immune-checkpoint treatment.
The response to immunotherapy of melanoma patients is heterogeneous. Here, the authors demonstrate that a high expression of the two major components of the immunoproteasome, PSMB8 and PSMB9, modulates the production of HLA peptides and it is predictive of better survival and improved response to immune-checkpoint inhibitors of melanoma patients.
METHODS:
Methods
TCGA melanoma tumor data
We downloaded TCGA gene expression and clinical profiles of 472 melanoma patients from the Genomic Data Common (GDC) TCGA data portal (https://portal.gdc.cancer.gov). (Supplementary Table 1).
Patient survival analysis
We performed two different analyses to identify the association of immunoproteasome genes with patient survival: Kaplan–Meier analysis and Cox proportional hazard model. We compared the survival of patients with high PSMB8 and PSMB9 (top tertile; N = 155) vs low PSMB8 and PSMB9 (bottom tertile; N = 156) using logrank test, and the effect size were quantified by the difference in the median survival time. To control for potential confounders, we performed a Cox regression analysis, while controlling for patients’ age, sex, race and tumor purity.where s is an indicator variable over all possible combinations of patients’ stratifications based on race and sex. hs is the hazard function (defined as the risk of death of patients per time unit), and h0s (t) is the baseline-hazard function at time t of the sth stratification. The model contains three covariates: (i) IP: IP subunits expression, (ii) age: age of the patient, and (iii) tumor purity: the cancer cell fraction in the bulk tumor samples. The β s are the regression coefficients of the covariates, which quantify the effect of covariates on patientsʼ survival, determined by standard likelihood maximization of the model. The association between patient survival and other variables including CD8A, CD4, CD3G, IFNG, PSMB5, and PSMB6 expression levels, IFNγ signature (summed expression levels of IFNG, JAK1, JAK2, STAT1, STAT2), CD8+ T-cell abundance, and mutational load were evaluated by replacing the IP variable in Formula (1) with each of these variables. The abundance of 22 immune cell types was estimated using CIBERSORT. For these variables, Cox regression analysis was performed with and without purity as a covariate. A multivariate Cox regression analysis was performed that incorporates IP subunit expression, CD8A, CD4, and CD3G expression, IFNγ signature, CD8+T-cell abundance, and mutational load altogether as independent variables.
Cytolytic activity
Cytolytic activity (CYT score) was calculated as described before ref.  for all melanoma samples in the TCGA dataset (N = 472). The expression levels of PSMB8 and PSMB9 were divided to low and high expression according to the average expression of each gene.
PSMB8 and PSMB9 expression in tumor vs healthy tissue samples
We downloaded transcriptomics data of 469 TCGA melanoma patients and 517 GTEx skin samples via UCSC Xena browser (http://xena.ucsc.edu), where the transcriptomics data was normalized with the exact same pipeline to facilitate the comparison between cancer vs healthy tissues. We compared the expression of PSMB8 and PSMB9 in these cancer vs healthy tissue samples using Student’s t test.
Cells
Cell lines 12T and 108T and their TILs were derived from pathology-confirmed metastatic melanoma tumor resections collected from patients enrolled in institutional review board (IRB)-approved clinical trials at the Surgery Branch of the National Cancer Institute. A375 is a commercial cell line that was purchase from ATCC. Whole exome sequencing (WES) of 108T and 12T was performed as described previously and available in dbSNP under accession 1062266. The mutation lists are in Supplementary Tables 14, 15. Patient information including the HLA haplotype of these patients is found in Supplementary Table 16. EBV-transformed B-cells were purchased from the IHWG Cell and DNA Bank. Hybridoma cells HB95 were purchased from the ATCC and were used to purify pan-HLA-I antibodies for the preparation of the HLA affinity columns. All cell lines were tested regularly and were found negative for mycoplasma contamination (EZ-PCR Mycoplasma Kit, Biological Industries). Cells were authenticated by Finger printing with STR profiling (Panel: PowerPlex_16_5Nov142UAGC, Size: GS500 x35 ×50 ×250, Analysis Type: Fragment (Animal), Software Package: SoftGenetics GeneMarker 1.85).
Stable expression of immunoproteasome subunits in melanoma cell lines
Human PSMB8 cDNA was cloned into the pCDF1-MCS2-EF1-Puromycin vector and human PSMB9 cDNA was cloned into the pCDH1-CMV-MCS-EF1-Neomycin vector (Systems Biosciences). To produce lentivirus, the constructs were cotransfected into HEK293T cells with the pVSV-G and pFIV-34N helper plasmids. Virus-containing medium was collected 72 h after transfection, and filtered, aliquotted and stored at −80 °C. 108T, 12T and A375 cells were grown in RPMI-1640 supplemented with 10% FBS. Lentivirus for PSMB8 and empty vector control were used to infect the cells, and after stable expression of the PSMB8 protein was determined by western blot analysis, the cells were then infected with the lentivirus for PSMB9 and empty vector respectively to produce cells with double transfection of PSMB8 and PSMB9 or two empty vectors. Each cell line was infected three times in order to receive three independent cell cultures of both double expression of the immunoproteasome subunits or empty vector control. Cell pellets of cells with overexpression or empty vector control were collected from 2 × 108 cells, and in total three different experimental replicates for each condition and cell line were collected.
Immunoblotting
To validate the stable infection of PSMB8 and PSMB9, cells were gently washed two time in PBS and then lysed in sample buffer 2×. The extracts were sonicated (50 W, 2 × 7 s), incubated on ice for 15 min, and boiled in 95 °C for 5 min. The samples were then subjected to 10% SDS-PAGE. Immunoblots were probed with anti-PSMB8 (13726, Cell Signalling), anti-PSMB9 (3328, Abcam) and anti-GAPDH (MAB374, Millipore). Blots were developed with HRP-conjugated anti-mouse or ant-rabbit Abs, using SuperSignal West Pico Chemiluminescent Substrate or SuperSignal West Femto Chemiluminescent Substrat from Thermo Scientific (Waltham, MA, USA). Pictures of the blots were taken using BioRad ChemiDoc MP system and figures prepared by using Image lab (BioRad). PSMB8 and PSMB9 were blotted from same cell lysate on different blots due to the proximity in their size.
IFNγ treatment
12T and 108T cells were treated with 250 U/ml IFNγ (Peprotech) for 48 h to induce a maximal expression of HLA molecules with minimal cell mortality. Three different experimental replicates of treated and non-treated cells were collected to cell pellets of 2 × 108 cells.
Flow cytometry
5 × 106 12T and 108T cells with immunoproteasome overexpression and empty vector control, and treated or non-treated with IFNγ were collected and washed with PBS. Then cells were incubated with PE/Cy7 anti-HLA-A, B, C (W6/32) antibody (311429, Biolegend) for 30 min on ice. Cells were later washed twice with PBS and analysed using BD LSR II flow cytometer (BD Biosciences). Data were analysed using the FlowJo software.
Proteasome activity assay
107 cells with overexpression or empty control cells were collected and washed twice with PBS. Cell pellets were later re-suspended in lysis buffer (50 mM TRIS pH 8 and 0.5% NP-40). Lysates were passed 10 times through a 28 G needle, incubated on ice for 15 min, and then centrifuged at 16,000g for 30 min. Protein concentration was measured using PierceTM BCA protein assay kit (Thermo Scientific). 20 μg of cellular lysate was incubated in reaction buffer (50 mM HEPES pH8, 5 mM MgCl2, 2 mM ATP, 1 mM DTT) and 0.1 mM suc-LLVY-AMC or ac-PAL-AMC (S-280 and S-310, Biotest). Fluorescence levels were measured every minute for 3.5 h, using the Typhoon-9410 laser flatbed scanner (GE Healthcare, USA) (Excitation: 360 nm, Emission: 460 nm). Background protease activity was determined for each condition from an identically prepared sample with the addition of 0.04 mM MG132 proteasome inhibitor (474791, Calbiochem). Each measurement was performed in four replicates. RFUs were plotted over time and another graph showing the RFU between starting and end time points.
Purification of membrane HLA molecules
For the HLA peptidomics analysis we used three experimental replicates per each cell line and each condition (empty vector/ overexpression and treated/ non-treated cells). Samples were processed as described previously. Briefly, cell pellets were lysed with lysis buffer containing 0.25% sodium deoxycholate, 0.2 mM iodoacetamide, 1 mM EDTA, 1:200 protease inhibitors cocktail (Sigma-Aldrich), 1 mM PMSF and 1%octyl-b-D glucopyranoside in PBS, and then incubated at 4 °C for 1 h. The lysates were cleared by centrifugation at 4 °C and 48,000g for 60 min, and then passed through a pre-clearing column containing Protein-A Sepharose beads.
HLA-I molecules were immunoaffinity purified from cleared lysate with the pan-HLA-I antibody (W6/32 antibody purified from HB95 hybridoma cells) covalently bound to Protein-A Sepharose beads (Thermo Fisher Scientific, as in ref. ). Affinity column was washed first with 10 column volumes of 400 mM NaCl, 20 mM Tris–HCl, pH 8.0 and then with 10 volumes of 20 mM Tris-HCl, pH 8.0. The HLA peptides and HLA molecules were eluted with 1% TFA followed by separation of the peptides from the proteins by binding the eluted fraction to disposable reversed-phase C18 columns (Harvard Apparatus) as in ref. . Elution of the peptides was done with 30% acetonitrile (ACN) in 0.1% trifluoracetic acid (TFA). The eluted peptides were cleaned also by C18 stage tip.
Identification of the eluted HLA peptides
The HLA peptides were dried by vacuum centrifugation, re-solubilized with 0.1% formic acid and resolved on capillary reversed-phase chromatography on 075 × 300 mm laser-pulled capillaries, self-packed with C18 reversed-phase 3.5 μm beads (Reprosil-C18-Aqua, Dr. Maisch GmbH, Ammerbuch-Entringen, Germany). Chromatography was performed with the UltiMate 3000 RSLCnano-capillary UHPLC system (Thermo Fisher Scientific), which was coupled by electrospray to tandem mass spectrometry on Q-Exactive-Plus (Thermo Fisher Scientific). The HLA peptides were eluted with a linear gradient over 2 h from 5 to 28% acetonitrile with 0.1% formic acid at a flow rate of 0.15 µl/min. Data was acquired using a data-dependent “top 10” method, fragmenting the peptides by higher-energy collisional dissociation (HCD). Full scan MS spectra was acquired at a resolution of 70,000 at 200 m/z with a target value of 3 × 106 ions. Ions were accumulated to an AGC target value of 105 with a maximum injection time of generally 100 msec. The peptide match option was set to Preferred. Normalized collision energy was set to 25% and MS/MS resolution was 17,500 at 200 m/z. Fragmented m/z values were dynamically excluded from further selection for 20 s. The MS data were analyzed by MaxQuant version 1.5.3.8. Peptide were searched against the UniProt human database, and customized reference databases which contained the mutated sequences identified in the sample by WES. N-terminal acetylation (42.010565 Da) and methionine oxidation (15.994915 Da) were set as variable modifications. Enzyme specificity was set as unspecific and peptides FDR was set to 0.05. The match between runs option was enabled to allow matching of identifications across the samples belonging the same patient. HLA peptidomics data have been deposited to the ProteomeXchange Consortium via the PRIDE partner repository with the dataset identifier PXD015957.
Analysis of differentially presented peptides
Peptides identified through MaxQuant were first filtered to remove reverse sequences and known contaminants. Gibbs clustering was used to see if the peptides cluster according to the cells’ HLA haplotype and the cluster name was assigned for each peptide in the table. Similarly, using NetMHCpan 4.0, peptides were analyzed to see if they are predicted to bind the cells’ HLA haplotype, the binding prediction score was assigned to the peptide only if the rank <2%. Peptides were further used for the differential presentation analysis if they were assigned with HLA allele by both the Gibbs clustering and NetMHCpan predictions. Neo-antigens and TAAs were marked in a designated column. For the differential presentation analysis, graphics and statistical analysis we used the Perseus computational platform version 1.6.6.0. Peptide intensities were Log-2 transformed and missing intensity values were imputed by drawing random numbers from a Gaussian distribution with a standard deviation of 20% in comparison to the standard deviation of the measured peptide abundances. We excluded sample A375 OE3 from the analysis as lower number of peptides were identified in it compare to the other samples in the triplicate, as well as 108T OE2 as it was different from the two other replicates. Volcano plots which show differentially presented peptides of the relative intensities of HLA peptides between cells with overexpression of immunoproteasome subunits and empty vectors were created, as well as cells that were treated and non-treated with IFNγ. The x axis represent the Log2 fold changes of the peptide intensities, and the y axis represent the significance levels calculated by two-sided unpaired t test with a FDR of 0.05 and S0 of 1. The peptides that were found to be significantly differentially presented between the overexpressing cells and the empty vector control (or the treated vs. non-treated cells) were used for further analysis of peptides’ immunogenicity assay.
Gibbs clustering
In order to classify the clustered peptides into HLA alleles, we first identified for each allele its motif. For that we retrieved all HLA-I epitopes registered under this allele from the Immune epitope database (IEDB, www.iedb.org, as of July 2019). All peptides were annotated as positive in “MHC ligand assays” to the specific HLA-I allele and between 8 and 13 amino acids long. The GibbsCluster 2.0 server (www.cbs.dtu.dk/services/GibbsCluster) was used to align the peptides using the “MHC class I ligands of length 8–13” parameters, number of clusters was set to one and the trash cluster option was disabled.
Each set of peptides (patient and treatment/ overexpression) was also clustered using Gibbs clustering, with the “MHC class I ligands of length 8–13” parameters, number of clusters was set to six and the trash cluster option was enabled. All motifs were generated by Seq2Logo 2.0 (http://www.cbs.dtu.dk/biotools/Seq2Logo) with the default settings. Since the number of peptides per each allele is different, for alleles with a higher number of peptides (as the HLA-A alleles) the unbiased clustering resulted in more than one cluster for these alleles. In these cases, we added all clusters that matched the allele motif in the same category. The change in number of peptides to allele also resulted in clusters with mixed motifs that were similar. In these cases, we assigned the cluster to the allele that had the highest representation in the cluster and added a note to which other alleles are mixed within. We notice that most peptides that are not assigned to a specific cluster were also not predicted to bind any HLA allele by NetMHCpan and were longer. Those are probably unspecific contaminates that we excluded from all further analyses.
Identification of TAAs
We selected known cancer and melanoma antigens that were described previously in the Cancer/Testis database (CTDatabase, http://www.cta.lncc.br/), peptide database (https://www.cancerresearch.org/scientists/events-and-resources/peptide-database) and a human melanoma dataset.
Killing assay
5 × 105 12T and 108T cells with overexpressing the IP subunits or empty vector control, and treated or non-treated cells with IFNγ were seeded a day before in 6 well plates. TILs were added to wells in effector to target ratios of 0:1, 0.25:1, 0.5:1 and 1:1 and incubated for 8 h or 12 h for 12T and 108T, respectively. Then plates were washed twice by PBS to remove TILs. Cells were collected and live cells were counted with trypan blue using the Countess II Automated Cell Counter (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Each measurement was performed in three biological replicates.
Analysis of T-cell reactivity by IFNγ release assay
To evaluate the immunogenicity of the identified peptides the identified peptides were synthesized, loaded on antigen presenting cells and co-cultured with the autologous TILs. All synthetic peptides were purchased from GeneScript as crude peptides. EBV-transformed B cells that express the correct HLA allele were loaded with the candidate peptides at a concentration of 10 μM for 2 h at 37 °C. Following three washing steps, the loaded B-cells were co-cultured with the autologous TILs in 1:1 ratio (105 cells) for an overnight incubation. The amounts of soluble IFNγ secreted from the TILs were measured by ELISA assay (ELISA MAX™ Deluxe Set Human IFNγ, Biolegend). Plates were scanned using the Typhoon-9410 laser flatbed scanner (GE Healthcare, USA) and analysed using MyAssays analysis software tool (www.myassays.com). Concentrations were calculated using four parameter logistic fit. From each peptide measurement we reduced the background measurement of the control, which was the same B-cells to which we added only DMSO and were later co-cultured with the TILs. All measurements were done in triplicates. A control peptide was used to normalize the concentration values between different ELISA plates of the same experiment. Graphs and statistics were done using GraphPad Prism 5.
Predicting the effectiveness of immune-checkpoint inhibitors therapy
We analyzed two different melanoma cohorts treated with anti-CTLA4 therapy and anti-PD1 therapy. We compared the IP subunit expression between responders and non-responders using Wilcoxon ranksum test. The predictive power of the IP subunits, mutational load, IFNγ signature, cytolytic score, CD8+ T-cell abundance, and PDL1 expression (for anti-PD1 cohort only) for the success of immunotherapy was evaluated using ROC and precision-recall analysis with varying tumor purity thresholds. Partial correlation analysis was performed using R library ‘ppcor’ to determine Kendall rank correlation between IP subunit expression and response to ICT while controlling for mutational load, tumor purity, IFNγ signature, and CD8+ T-cell abundance.
Reporting summary
Further information on research design is available in the Nature Research Reporting Summary linked to this article.