ABSTRACT:
We present a workflow using an ETD-optimised version of Mascot Percolator and a modified version of SLoMo (turbo-SLoMo) for analysis of phosphoproteomic data. We have benchmarked this against several database searching algorithms and phosphorylation site localisation tools and show that it offers highly sensitive and confident phosphopeptide identification and site assignment with PSM-level statistics, enabling rigorous comparison of data acquisition methods. We analysed the Plasmodium falciparum schizont phosphoproteome using for the first time, a data-dependent neutral loss-triggered-ETD (DDNL) strategy and a conventional decision-tree method. At a posterior error probability threshold of 0.01, similar numbers of PSMs were identified using both methods with a 73% overlap in phosphopeptide identifications. The false discovery rate associated with spectral pairs where DDNL CID/ETD identified the same phosphopeptide was < 1%. 72% of phosphorylation site assignments using turbo-SLoMo without any score filtering, were identical and 99.8% of these cases are associated with a false localisation rate of < 5%. We show that DDNL acquisition is a useful approach for phosphoproteomics and results in an increased confidence in phosphopeptide identification without compromising sensitivity or duty cycle. Furthermore, the combination of Mascot Percolator and turbo-SLoMo represents a robust workflow for phosphoproteomic data analysis using CID and ETD fragmentation.
Biological significance
Protein phosphorylation is a ubiquitous post-translational modification that regulates protein function. Mass spectrometry-based approaches have revolutionised its analysis on a large-scale but phosphorylation sites are often identified by single phosphopeptides and therefore require more rigorous data analysis to unsure that sites are identified with high confidence for follow-up experiments to investigate their biological significance. The coverage and confidence of phosphoproteomic experiments can be enhanced by the use of multiple complementary fragmentation methods. Here we have benchmarked a data analysis pipeline for analysis of phosphoproteomic data generated using CID and ETD fragmentation and used it to demonstrate the utility of a data-dependent neutral loss triggered ETD fragmentation strategy for high confidence phosphopeptide identification and phosphorylation site localisation.
Graphical abstract
Highlights
We report and benchmark a data analysis pipeline for phosphoproteomic data analysis.
Combined use of Mascot Percolator and turbo-SLoMo to compare fragmentation methods
CID and ETD fragmentation for phosphorylation site identification
Demonstrate the utility of data-dependent neutral loss triggered ETD fragmentation
High confidence of phosphoproteomic analysis using ETD/CID spectral pairs
METHODS:
Experimental procedures
Preparation of parasites
P. falciparum strain 3D7 was cultured in 2.5–5% O + human erythrocytes with 0.5% Albumax II in custom-made RPMI media (Invitrogen) and parasites were collected by saponin lysis, an approach that removes the vast majority of erythrocyte material. Briefly, infected erythrocytes were pelleted and re-suspended in 5–10 ml of 0.1% Saponin lysis buffer (0.1% Saponin in PBS) and incubated at room temperature for 5 min before being centrifuged at 3200 ×g for 10 min. After centrifugation, the supernatant was discarded and the parasite pellet was washed with 0.1% Saponin lysis buffer and centrifuged again at 3200 ×g for 10 min. Washes with 0.1% Saponin lysis buffer were repeated until supernatants were completely clear.
Protein extraction, digestion and clean up
Parasite pellets were re-suspended in extraction buffer (4% SDS, 0.1 M DTT, 0.1 M Tris pH 8, 0.5 mM PMSF, 2 μg/ml Aprotinin/Leupeptin, 20 μM ZnCl and 25 mM Sodium fluoride), homogenised in a 2 ml dounce homogeniser with 25 strokes and DNA was sheared by passing the lysate through a fine gauge needle. The sample was heated for 5 min @ 97 °C and insoluble material was pelleted by centrifugation at 14,000 rpm for 10 min. The insoluble pellet was further extracted by addition of urea (once cooled to room temperature) to a final concentration of 8 M. Homogenisation and centrifugation steps were repeated and supernatants containing solubilized protein from both extractions were pooled and applied to a pre-washed Amicom-15 centrifugal filter unit (30 kD MWCO) (Millipore). The protein sample (4 mg) was processed according to the FASP procedure  in which SDS was removed by buffer exchange with urea and cysteine alkylation was performed in situ with iodoacetamide and proteins were digested with Trypsin Gold (Promega) for 4 h at 37 °C at an enzyme substrate ratio of 1:20 with a urea concentration of 1.8 M and 100 mM ammonium bicarbonate. Peptides were collected by centrifugation and addition of 100 mM ammonium bicarbonate to the upper chamber of the unit and further centrifugation. Collected peptides were adjusted to a 0.4% TFA and desalted using a Sep-Pak® Light C18 cartridge (Waters) and dried down using a SpeedVac (Thermo Scientific).
IMAC purification
IMAC purifications were performed as described, with the following modifications. Peptides were re-suspended in IMAC loading buffer (50% acetonitrile, 0.1% TFA) and incubated with pre-equilibrated Phos-Select beads (Sigma) for 1 h at room temperature. The beads were then transferred to a TopTip (Glygen) and washed once with IMAC loading buffer, 1% acetic acid and then water. Phosphopeptides were eluted with 100 μl ammonia water pH 11 and acidified using formic acid. Phosphopeptides from two IMAC purifications were pooled and split into 6 aliquots for LC–MS/MS analysis.
LC–MS/MS analysis
Phosphopeptide samples were analysed online using an Ultimate 3000 nano/Capillary LC System (Dionex) coupled to an LTQ Orbitrap Velos hybrid mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific) equipped with a nanospray ion source. Peptides were desalted on-line using a micro-Precolumn cartridge (C18 Pepmap 100, LC Packings) (with 0.5% acetic acid) and then separated using a 320 min RP gradient (4–30% acetonitrile/0.1% formic acid) on an Acclaim PepMap100 C18 analytical column (3 μm, 75 μm id × 50 cm) (Dionex) with a flow rate of 0.3 μl/min. The mass spectrometer was operated in standard data dependent acquisition mode controlled by Xcalibur 2.1. The instrument was operated with a cycle of one MS (in the Orbitrap) acquired at a resolution of 60,000 at m/z 400, with the top 10 most abundant multiply-charged (2 + and higher) ions in a given chromatographic window subjected to either CID or ETD fragmentation in the linear ion trap with supplemental activation enabled. An FTMS target value of 1e6 and an ion trap MSn target value of 1e4 were used. Dynamic exclusion was enabled with a repeat duration of 45 s with an exclusion list of 500 and exclusion duration of 30 s. Lock mass of 445.120025 was enabled for all experiments. Triplicate DT experiments were performed using the standard charge and mass/charge settings in the instrument method file. Triplicate DDNL experiments were performed when neutral loss peaks corresponding to the loss of phosphoric acid from precursor ions in CID were observed within the top 5 most intense CID peaks. We also performed proteome profiling experiments (1 μg of desalted FASP digest) using direct LC–MS/MS analyses; triplicate experiments using CID fragmentation and triplicate DT experiments with 4-hour LC gradients using the same LC setup and acquisition parameters described above.
Data processing and database searching
All raw MS data files were processed and converted into MGF file format using Proteome Discoverer 1.1 (Thermo Scientific). A precursor filter of 600–10,000 Da and a non-fragment filter were applied to ETD spectra to remove un-reacted precursor peaks, charge reduced precursor peaks, neutral losses from charge reduced precursors and FT Overtones using default settings. All ion trap spectra with less than 15 fragmentation peaks were removed and a signal to noise filter of 3 was applied to all spectra. All datasets were searched using Mascot v2.2 (Matrix Science) against a combined Human (IPI, 2010) and P. falciparum (GeneDB) sequence database (79,637 sequences) using the following search parameters: trypsin with a maximum of 3 missed cleavages, 10 ppm for MS mass tolerance, 0.5 Da for MS/MS mass tolerance, with Acetyl (Protein N-term), Oxidation (M), Deamidated (NQ), Carbamidomethyl (C) and Phospho (ST) set as variable modifications. ETD spectra were searched using c, z and y ion series and CID data was searched using b and y ion series. All searches used Mascot's automated decoy database searching. All data was further analysed using Mascot Percolator V2 (http://www.sanger.ac.uk/resources/software/mascotpercolator/) to re-score PSMs and generate final datasets with initially a q-value of 0.01 and then a posterior error probability (PEP) threshold of 0.01 was applied to the data to generate a higher confidence dataset with a less than 1% FDR at the PSM level. Only top ranked hits were reported. Phosphorylation site localisation was performed using an in-house version of SLoMo, Ascore and the Mascot Delta score. To allow high-throughput analysis of the data several in-house changes were made to the original SLoMo modification site localisation tool to generate our version of the software, turbo-SLoMo (http://www.sanger.ac.uk/resources/software/). SLoMo was adapted to read spectra in MGF format, and to also generate a single combined output results summary file. New command line options were added to allow all or a subset of modifications (such as all phosphorylation modifications) to be processed in a single run. Options were also added to run the tool in a batch mode that allowed a single analysis to be split over many computational nodes. Finally, we also added additional filtering to exclude spectra with low Mascot Percolator PEP scores and with large numbers of variable modifications. Mascot delta scores were calculated as the ion score difference between rank 1 PSMs and the next same sequence rank ion score within the top 10 ranks reported by Mascot. In cases where an additional same sequence rank hit was not found, a delta score could not be calculated and therefore was not considered a PSM with a localised phosphorylation site. Delta score thresholds for CID and ETD (with supplemental activation) equating to 1% and 5% false localisation rates were taken from. CID and ETD spectra from DT experiments and CID spectra from DDNL experiments were also searched with the addition of Phospho Y to identify putative tyrosine phosphorylation sites. PSMs (PEP < 0.01) with confidently localised tyrosine phosphorylation sites (5% FLR) were accepted and in cases where a spectrum also matched an alternative Phospho (ST) site then the PSM with the highest turbo-SLoMo score was chosen and the score difference between potential pY and pST sites included in Table S6. Mascot dat files were converted to PRIDE XML files with PRIDE Converter v2.0.9 and uploaded to the ProteomeXchange Consortium (http://proteomecentral.proteomexchange.org) via the PRIDE partner repository with the dataset identifier PXD000070 and DOI http://dx.doi.org/10.6019/PXD000070 and available in the PRIDE database (http://www.ebi.ac.uk/pride/) with accession numbers 27915-27926.
All raw MS data files were processed and converted into MGF file format using Proteome Discoverer 1.1 (Thermo Scientific). A precursor filter of 600–10,000 Da and a non-fragment filter were applied to ETD spectra to remove un-reacted precursor peaks, charge reduced precursor peaks, neutral losses from charge reduced precursors and FT Overtones using default settings. All ion trap spectra with less than 15 fragmentation peaks were removed and a signal to noise filter of 3 was applied to all spectra. All datasets were searched using Mascot v2.2 (Matrix Science) against a combined Human (IPI, 2010) and P. falciparum (GeneDB) sequence database (79,637 sequences) using the following search parameters: trypsin with a maximum of 3 missed cleavages, 10 ppm for MS mass tolerance, 0.5 Da for MS/MS mass tolerance, with Acetyl (Protein N-term), Oxidation (M), Deamidated (NQ), Carbamidomethyl (C) and Phospho (ST) set as variable modifications. ETD spectra were searched using c, z and y ion series and CID data was searched using b and y ion series. All searches used Mascot's automated decoy database searching. All data was further analysed using Mascot Percolator V2 (http://www.sanger.ac.uk/resources/software/mascotpercolator/) to re-score PSMs and generate final datasets with initially a q-value of 0.01 and then a posterior error probability (PEP) threshold of 0.01 was applied to the data to generate a higher confidence dataset with a less than 1% FDR at the PSM level. Only top ranked hits were reported. Phosphorylation site localisation was performed using an in-house version of SLoMo, Ascore and the Mascot Delta score. To allow high-throughput analysis of the data several in-house changes were made to the original SLoMo modification site localisation tool to generate our version of the software, turbo-SLoMo (http://www.sanger.ac.uk/resources/software/). SLoMo was adapted to read spectra in MGF format, and to also generate a single combined output results summary file. New command line options were added to allow all or a subset of modifications (such as all phosphorylation modifications) to be processed in a single run. Options were also added to run the tool in a batch mode that allowed a single analysis to be split over many computational nodes. Finally, we also added additional filtering to exclude spectra with low Mascot Percolator PEP scores and with large numbers of variable modifications. Mascot delta scores were calculated as the ion score difference between rank 1 PSMs and the next same sequence rank ion score within the top 10 ranks reported by Mascot. In cases where an additional same sequence rank hit was not found, a delta score could not be calculated and therefore was not considered a PSM with a localised phosphorylation site. Delta score thresholds for CID and ETD (with supplemental activation) equating to 1% and 5% false localisation rates were taken from. CID and ETD spectra from DT experiments and CID spectra from DDNL experiments were also searched with the addition of Phospho Y to identify putative tyrosine phosphorylation sites. PSMs (PEP < 0.01) with confidently localised tyrosine phosphorylation sites (5% FLR) were accepted and in cases where a spectrum also matched an alternative Phospho (ST) site then the PSM with the highest turbo-SLoMo score was chosen and the score difference between potential pY and pST sites included in Table S6. Mascot dat files were converted to PRIDE XML files with PRIDE Converter v2.0.9 and uploaded to the ProteomeXchange Consortium (http://proteomecentral.proteomexchange.org) via the PRIDE partner repository with the dataset identifier PXD000070 and DOI http://dx.doi.org/10.6019/PXD000070 and available in the PRIDE database (http://www.ebi.ac.uk/pride/) with accession numbers 27915-27926.