ABSTRACT:
Background
Meningioma is the most frequent primary intracranial tumour. Surgical resection remains the main therapeutic option as pharmacological intervention is hampered by poor knowledge of their proteomic signature. There is an urgent need to identify new therapeutic targets and biomarkers of meningioma.
Methods
We performed proteomic profiling of grade I, II and III frozen meningioma specimens and three normal healthy human meninges using LC-MS/MS to analyse global proteins, enriched phosphoproteins and phosphopeptides. Differential expression and functional annotation of proteins was completed using Perseus, IPA® and DAVID. We validated differential expression of proteins and phosphoproteins by Western blot on a meningioma validation set and by immunohistochemistry.
Findings
We quantified 3888 proteins and 3074 phosphoproteins across all meningioma grades and normal meninges. Bioinformatics analysis revealed commonly upregulated proteins and phosphoproteins to be enriched in Gene Ontology terms associated with RNA metabolism. Validation studies confirmed significant overexpression of proteins such as EGFR and CKAP4 across all grades, as well as the aberrant activation of the downstream PI3K/AKT pathway, which seems differential between grades. Further, we validated upregulation of the total and activated phosphorylated form of the NIMA-related kinase, NEK9, involved in mitotic progression. Novel proteins identified and validated in meningioma included the nuclear proto-oncogene SET, the splicing factor SF2/ASF and the higher-grade specific protein, HK2, involved in cellular metabolism.
Interpretation
Overall, we generated a proteomic thesaurus of meningiomas for the identification of potential biomarkers and therapeutic targets.
Fund
This study was supported by Brain Tumour Research.
METHODS:
Materials and methods
Clinical material
Anonymised meningioma samples under the ‘J’ series were provided by the BRain Archive and Information Network (BRAIN UK) under ethical approval by the South West research ethics committee (REC No: 14/SC/0098; IRAS project ID: 143874, BRAIN UK Ref: 15/011). Anonymised ‘MN’ meningioma samples were collected under ethical approval by the South West research ethics committee (REC No: 14/SW/0119; IRAS project ID: 153351) and local research and development approval (Plymouth Hospitals NHS Trust: R&D No: 14/P/056 and North Bristol NHS Trust: R&D No: 3458). Clinical and histological details about the specimens are presented in Supplementary Tables S1 and S2. Tumours were separated into a ‘discovery set’ for MS analysis consisting of 22 meningiomas (WHO grade I: n = 8, WHO grade II: n = 8, WHO grade III: n = 6) and a ‘validation set’ composed of 15 meningioma samples (WHO grade I: n = 5, WHO grade II: n = 5, WHO grade III: n = 5). Two frozen normal meninges were obtained from Analytical Biological Services Inc. and one human brain cerebral meninges was purchased from Novus Biologicals® (NB820-59183; lot B105014).
Phosphoprotein and phosphopeptide enrichment
For both phosphoprotein and phosphopeptide enrichment 2·5 mg of protein lysate was used as starting material. Phosphoproteins were enriched from frozen tissue using the commercially available Qiagen® PhosphoProtein Purification Kit (Qiagen) according to the manufacturer's instructions. Previous studies using this kit have reported an 88% elution recovery of phosphoproteins. Protein concentration was determined as before.
For phosphopeptide enrichment, samples were homogenised from frozen in lysis buffer (8 M urea, 100 mM Tris-HCl, pH 8·0). Samples were frozen at −80 °C for 24 h, thawed on ice and centrifuged at 16,000 ×g for 15 min at 4 °C. Supernatant was collected in Eppendorf® Protein LoBind microcentrifuge tubes and protein concentration determined. Prior to enrichment using titanium dioxide (TiO2) beads, 2·5 mg of protein lysate was subjected to in-solution digestion. Proteins were reduced and alkylated by incubation with 0·1 M dithiotheitol (DTT) for 30 min at room temperature (RT), followed by further incubation with 50 mM 2-iodoacetamide in the dark for 15 min at RT. Lys-C protease (Lysyl Endopeptidase®, Mass Spectrometry Grade, Wako) was then added at a protease: protein ratio of 1: 100 (w/w) in 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate (ABC) and incubated overnight (O/N) at 37 °C. Samples were diluted in 50 mM ABC to a final concentration of 2 M urea and incubated O/N at 37 °C with trypsin (Promega, Wisconsin, US), added at a protease: protein ratio of 1: 50 (w/w). Digested samples were acidified to a final concentration of 0·1% trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) and peptides desalted using HyperSep™ C18 Cartridges (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Massachusetts, US). Columns were washed with buffer A (1% TFA, 0·5% acetic acid), phosphopeptides eluted in buffer B (80% acetonitrile (ACN, LC-MS grade), 0·5% acetic acid, 1% TFA) and dried in a vacuum concentrator. Phosphopeptides were enriched by batch-wise incubation with Titansphere 10 μm TiO2 beads (GL Sciences) as described by Lasonder et al. with the following modifications. Initially, TiO2 beads (1 mg beads per incubation) were incubated in wash buffer A (80% ACN, 5% TFA) followed by incubation in buffer B (60% ACN, 5% TFA, 5% glycerol) for 5 min at 1000 rpm, RT. TiO2 beads were sedimented by centrifugation at 2000 ×g for 1 min, buffer removed, sample peptide digests added in 1·5 ml Eppendorf® vials and incubated with the beads under continuous shaking for 1 h. Beads were washed three times with 100 μl buffer B, followed by three washes with 100 μl buffer A. Phosphopeptides were eluted following a two-step elution protocol by Fukuda et al., acidified with TFA, purified by stop and go extraction (STAGE) tips and stored at −20 °C prior to mass spectrometry (MS) analysis.
Protein fractionation and in-gel digestion
Proteins and phosphoproteins were separated using SDS-PAGE on 4–15% Mini-PROTEAN® TGX™ Precast Gels (Bio-Rad). For global proteome analysis 50 μg of protein lysate was separated. Gels were stained with Coomassie Blue R-350 (GE Healthcare Life Sciences) until lanes were visible. Destaining was performed using a destaining solution (50% LC/MS grade water, 40% MeOH and 10% acetic acid) O/N at RT. Sample lanes were excised from gels, sliced into 6 fractions that were cut into 1 × 1 mm pieces before in-gel digestion. In-gel digestion was performed following Shevchenko et al.. Briefly, gel pieces were equilibrated with alternate incubation of 100% acetonitrile and 50 mM ABC. Proteins were reduced by incubation with 10 mM DTT in 50 mM ABC for 20 min at 56 °C in shaking at 700 rpm and then alkylated by incubation with 50 mM 2-iodoacetamide in 50 mM ABC for 20 min at RT in the dark. Proteins were digested in 12·5 ng/μl trypsin (Promega, Wisconsin, US) in 50 mM ABC O/N at 37 °C. Digested peptides were acidified with a final concentration of 2% TFA for 20 min at RT 1400 rpm. Peptides were then extracted by two 5 min incubations of gel pieces with buffer B (80% ACN, 0.5% acetic acid, 1% TFA) at 1400 rpm. Supernatant was pooled together for each sample and ACN was evaporated in a vacuum concentrator.
Digested peptides and phosphopeptides were purified by STAGE tips. Peptides were loaded onto C18-StageTips (Empore™ SPE Disks C18, 3 M) conditioned by 50 μl of methanol and equilibrated using 50 μl buffer B (80% ACN, 0·5% acetic acid, 1% TFA) followed by 50 μl buffer A (1% TFA, 0·5% acetic acid). Tips were washed with 50 μl buffer A and peptides eluted in 40 μl buffer B into LoBind microcentrifuge tubes. Eluted peptides were dried down completely in a vacuum concentrator and peptides resuspended in buffer A.
Liquid chromatography tandem mass spectrometry and protein identification
MS and protein identification was carried out as previously described, with the following modifications. MS data was analysed to identify proteins with the Andromeda peptide database search engine integrated into the computational proteomics platform MaxQuant version (1.5.0.30). Andromeda search parameters for protein identification specified a first search mass tolerance of 20 ppm and a main search tolerance of 4·5 ppm for the parental peptide. Minimal peptide length was set at six amino acids. Proteins were quantified with label free quantification (LFQ) values representing normalised summed peptide intensities correlating with protein abundances, where the ‘match between run’ option was permitted between runs with a 0·7 min elution time interval. Venn diagrams depicting the distribution of identified proteins and phosphoproteins were created with Venny 2.1 (http://bioinfogp.cnb.csic.es/tools/venny/index.html).
Protein quantification analysis and functional annotation analysis
LFQ values were log2 transformed using the Perseus software suite 1.5.0.31 to achieve normal data distribution, which was verified by visual inspection of histogram distribution plots of log2 transformed data generated in Perseus for each sample. Proteins identified in at least three runs were considered for LFQ and entries with an LFQ equal to zero were kept. Statistical significance of changes in abundance between sample groups was calculated by a two-tailed t-test, with p-values adjusted for multiple testing by a permutation-based FDR at 5%. Microsoft Excel was used to calculate ratios and fold changes (FC) followed by log2 transformation. A log2 FC ≥ 1·5 and log2 FC ≤ −1·5 with adjusted p-value < 0·05 were considered. Results are visualised by Volcano plots. Differentially expressed proteins (DEPs) for hierarchical clustering were obtained by submitting relative expression profiles identified in at least three runs to Perseus and performing a four-group one-way ANOVA (p-value < 0·05) on imputation supplemented data. Venn diagrams depicting upregulated proteins and phosphoproteins among all meningioma grades were created using euler APE (http://www.eulerdiagrams.org/eulerAPE/).
Pathway enrichment analysis was generated through the use of IPA® (QIAGEN Inc., https://www.qiagenbioinformatics.com/products/ingenuity-pathway-analysis). Statistical significance of enriched pathways was assessed by right-tailed Fisher's exact test and considered significant for p (FET) < 0.05. GO enrichment analyses were performed using the Database for Annotation, Visualization and Integrated Discovery (DAVID) v6.8 (https://david.ncifcrf.gov/) against a background of the H. sapiens proteome. Enrichment of GO FAT terms was considered statistically significant when corrected for multiple testing by the Benjamini-Hochberg method with adjusted p-values < 0·05. Cytoscape plugin Enrichment Map (http://www.cytoscape.org/) was used to visualise enriched GO terms.
Molecular signatures for higher grade meningiomas were generated with the GeneSign module in BubbleGUM software (https://omictools.com/bubblegum-tool). Grade II and III samples were defined as subsets of interest (test classes), with NMT and grade I samples as references. The Mean (test)/ Mean method was applied for extracting molecular signatures.
Phosphorylation sites were classified as described by Villen et al. with the following addition: pY at position 0 then classify as “Tyrosine”.
DNA purification and genotyping
DNA purification was performed with Qiagen® DNeasy® Blood & Tissue Kit (Qiagen) following manufacturer's instructions. DNA was screened for NF2 mutations by the Manchester Centre for Genomic Medicine using Next Generation sequencing (NGS) and Multiplex Ligation-dependent Probe Amplification (MLPA®) dosage test. Mutational screening of AKT1, KLF4, TRAF7, SMO, SMARCB1 and POLR2A was completed using KASP genotyping.
Cell culture and proliferation assay
The immortalised benign meningioma cell line, Ben-Men-1 (BM1) (DSMZ Cat# ACC-599, RRID:CVCL_1959) and the malignant meningioma cell line KT21-MG1 (KT21) (RRID:CVCL_M429) were cultured in meningioma medium (Dulbecco's Modified Eagle's Media (DMEM; Thermo Fisher Scientific), supplemented with 10% foetal bovine serum (FBS; Sigma-Aldrich®), 1% d-(+)-glucose (Sigma-Aldrich®), 100 U/ml penicllin/streptomycin (Thermo Fisher Scientific) and 2 mM l-glutamine (Thermo Fisher Scientific)) at 37 °C in humidified 5% CO2. Human meningeal cells (HMC) were obtained from ScienCell™ and routinely cultured in the manufacturer's recommended medium and growth supplements at 37 °C in humidified 5% CO2. BM1 and KT21 cell lines were plated in 96-well culture plates (Greiner Bio-One; #655088) at approximately 3000 cells per well. Cells were allowed to adhere and proliferate for 24 h. AZD5363 and Ku-0063794 (Selleckchem.com) were resuspended in dimethyl sulfoxide (DMSO; Sigma-Aldrich®) and serially diluted to the appropriate concentration in meningioma medium. Vehicle-treated control cells were grown with the addition of 0·1% DMSO. Cells were treated every 24 h by careful removal of media from wells, as not to detach cells, followed by addition of fresh drug during a 72 h incubation period at 37 °C in humidified 5% CO2. Cell viability was determined using the ‘CellTiter-Glo® Luminescent Cell Viability Assay’ (Promega; #G7570). Each drug concentration was tested in triplicate. Cell viability was calculated as a percentage of control cells, untreated cells as negative control and media alone as positive control. Graphs were generated using GraphPad Prism 5.
Cell lysate and tumour tissue preparation
Meningioma tissue samples of the validation set were manually homogenised from frozen in approximately 400 μl lysis buffer consisting of RIPA buffer (50 mM Tris-HCl pH 7.4, 0·1% SDS, 1% NP-40, 150 mM NaCl, 1 mM ethylenediaminetetraacetic acid (EDTA), 0·5% sodium deoxycholate) protease inhibitor used at 1:20 (cOmplete™, EDTA-free Protease Inhibitor Cocktail, Sigma-Aldrich®; #11873580001) and phosphatase inhibitor cocktails used at 1:100 (Santa Cruz Biotechnology, Inc.; sc-45,045; sc-45,065). Cells were similarly lysed in a volume of lysis buffer appropriate for the size of cell culture dish. Lysates were placed at −80 °C for at least 24 h before being thawed on ice and centrifuged at 16,000 ×g for 15 min at 4 °C. Supernatant was transferred to fresh 1·5 ml microcentrifuge tubes and protein concentration determined as before using the Pierce™ BCA Protein Assay Kit.
Western blotting
Proteins were separated on 8% or 15% Laemmli SDS-PAGE, depending upon the molecular weight of the protein of interest and transferred to a polyvinylidene difluoride membrane (Immun-Blot® PVDF membrane, Bio-Rad). Membranes were blocked for 1 h at room temperature with 5% skimmed milk in phosphate buffered saline (PBS) with 0·05% Tween-20, before incubation with specific primary antibodies O/N at 4 °C. Primary antibody details are listed in Supplementary Table S3. Specific antigen-antibody interaction was detected with anti-mouse and anti-rabbit secondary antibodies conjugated to horseradish peroxidise (Bio-Rad). Detection was achieved using the ECL or ECL Plus Western Blotting substrate (Pierce). Membranes were exposed to Amersham Hyperfilm ECL (GE Healthcare Life Sciences). Films were scanned at a resolution of 600 dpi using a HP Scanjet 2400.
Immunohistochemistry
Four-micrometer paraffin sections were de-waxed, rehydrated and incubated with primary antibodies at room temperature O/N using antigen retrieval methods as previously described. Primary antibody details are listed in Supplementary Table S3. Proteins were visualised with the Vectastain Universal Elite ABC kit (Vector Laboratories Ltd). Slides were counterstained with haematoxylin (Sigma-Aldrich). As a control, sections were incubated with omission of the primary antibody. Immunohistochemical results were reviewed by neuropathologist, Hilton, DA. Semi-quantitative assessment of staining intensity was scored as follows: 0 if negative; 1 if low immunoreactivity; 2 if moderate and 3 if high.
Data availability
Proteomics data have been deposited to the ProteomeXchange Consortium via the PRIDE partner repository with the following dataset identifiers and reviewer account details: global proteome PXD007073; phosphoproteome PXD007044; phosphopeptides PXD007125.