ABSTRACT:
A decline of skeletal muscle strength with aging is a primary cause of mobility loss and frailty in older persons, but the molecular mechanisms of such decline are not understood. Here, we performed quantitative proteomic analysis from skeletal muscle collected from 58 healthy persons aged 20 to 87 years. In muscle from older persons, ribosomal proteins and proteins related to energetic metabolism, including those related to the TCA cycle, mitochondria respiration, and glycolysis, were underrepresented, while proteins implicated in innate and adaptive immunity, proteostasis, and alternative splicing were overrepresented. Consistent with reports in animal models, older human muscle was characterized by deranged energetic metabolism, a pro-inflammatory environment and increased proteolysis. Changes in alternative splicing with aging were confirmed by RNA-seq analysis. We propose that changes in the splicing machinery enables muscle cells to respond to a rise in damage with aging.
eLife digest
As humans age, their muscles become weaker, making it increasingly harder for them to move, a condition known as sarcopenia. Analyzing old muscles in other animals revealed that they produce energy inefficiently, they destroy more proteins than younger muscles, and they have high levels of molecules that cause inflammation. These characteristics may be involved in causing muscle weakness.
Proteomics is the study of proteins, the molecules that play many roles in keeping the body working: for example, they accelerate chemical reactions, participate in copying DNA and help cells respond to stimuli. Using proteomics, it is possible to examine a large number of the different proteins in a tissue, which can provide information about the state of that tissue. Ubaida-Mohien et al. used this approach to answer the question of why muscles become weaker with age.
First, they analyzed the levels of all the proteins found in skeletal muscle collected from 58 healthy volunteers between 20 and 87 years of age. This revealed that the muscles of older people have fewer copies of the proteins that make up ribosomes – the cellular machines that produce new proteins – and fewer proteins involved in providing the cell with chemical energy. In contrast, proteins implicated in the immune system, in the maintenance of existing proteins, and in processing other molecules called RNAs were more abundant in older muscles.
Ubaida-Mohien et al. then looked more closely at changes involving RNA processing. Cells make proteins by copying DNA sequences into an RNA template and using this template to instruct the ribosomes on how to make the specific protein. Before the RNA can be ‘read’ by a ribosome, however, some parts must be cut out and others added, which can lead to different versions of the final RNA, also known as alternative transcripts.
In order to check whether the difference in the levels of proteins that process RNAs was affecting the RNAs being produced, Ubaida-Mohien et al. extracted the RNAs from older and younger muscles and compared them. This showed that the RNA in older people had more alternative transcripts, confirming that the change in protein levels was having downstream effects.
Currently, it is not possible to prevent or delay the loss of muscle strength associated with aging. Understanding how the protein make-up of muscles changes as humans grow older may help find new ways to prevent and perhaps even reverse this decline.
METHODS:
Materials and methods
Study design and participants
Muscle biopsies analyzed in this study were collected from participants from the Genetic and Epigenetic Study of Aging and Laboratory Testing (GESTALT). Participants were enrolled in GESTALT if they were free of major diseases, except for controlled hypertension or a history of cancer that had been clinically silent for at least 10 years, were not chronically on medications (except one antihypertensive drug), had no physical or cognitive impairments, had a BMI less than 30 kg/m2, and did not train professionally. Inclusion criteria were gathered from information on medical history, physical exams, and blood test interpreted by a trained nurse practitioner. Participants were evaluated at the Clinical Research Unit of the National Institute on Aging Intramural Research Program. Data and muscle specimens from 60 participants were available for this study. However, two participants were excluded because the muscle specimen provided was too small to obtain reliable proteomic data. Therefore, data from 58 participants dispersed over a wide age-range (20–34 y, n = 13; 35–49 y, n = 11; 50–64 y, n = 12; 65–79 y, n = 12; 80+ y, n = 10) were used for this study. Anthropometric parameters were objectively assessed. The level of physical activity was determined using an interview-administered standardized questionnaire originally developed for the Health, Aging and Body Composition Study and modeled after the Leisure-Time Physical Activity questionnaire. Total participation time in moderate to vigorous physical activity per week was calculated by multiplying frequency by amount of time performed for each activity, summing all of the activities, then dividing by two to derive minutes of moderate to vigorous physical activity per week, the following categories were used: <30 min per week of high intensity physical activity was considered ‘not active’ and coded as 0; high-intensity physical activity ≥30 and<75 min was considered ‘moderately active’ and coded as 1, high-intensity physical activity ≥75 and<150 min was considered ‘active’ and coded as 2, and high-intensity physical activity ≥150 min was considered to ‘highly active’ and coded as 3. An ordinal variable from 0 to 3 was used in the analysis. The GESTALT protocol is approved by the Intramural Research Program of the US National Institute on Aging and the Institutional Review Board of the National Institute of Environmental Health Sciences. All participants provided written, informed consent at every visit.
Muscle biopsies
The depth of the subcutaneous fat (uncompressed and compressed) was determined using MRI images of the middle thigh performed on the previous day. A region above the vastus lateralis muscle was marked at the mid-point of a line drawn between the great trochanter and the mid‐patella upper margin. The skin was prepped with povidone–iodine (Betadine) and ethyl alcohol, and the outside areas covered with sterile drapes. The biopsy site was anesthetized intradermally using a 27-gauge needle and then subcutaneously using a 23-gauge x 1 1/2 -inch needle, follow by an 18-gauge spinal needle, with ~15 mL of 1% lidocaine with sodium bicarbonate. The operator was careful that the anesthetic was infiltrated in the subcutaneous tissue and above the muscle fascia but not the muscle fibers not to distort the tissue structure and induce a gene expression response. A 6‐mm Bergstrom biopsy needle was inserted through the skin and fascia incision into the muscle, and muscle tissue samples were obtained using a standard method. Biopsy specimens cut into small sections were snap frozen in liquid nitrogen and subsequently stored at −80°C until used for analyses.
Sample preparation and protein extraction
On average 8 mg of muscle tissue was pulverized in liquid nitrogen and mixed with the lysis buffer containing protease inhibitor cocktail (8 M Urea, 2M Thiourea, 4% CHAPS, 1% Triton X-100, 50 mM Tris, pH 8.5 (Sigma)). Protein concentration was determined using commercially available 2-D quant kit (GE Healthcare Life Sciences). Sample quality was confirmed using NuPAGE protein gels stained with fluorescent SyproRuby protein stain (Thermo Fisher).
In order to remove detergents and lipids 300 μg of muscle tissue lysate were precipitated using standard methanol/chloroform extraction protocol. Proteins were resuspended in concentrated urea buffer (8 M Urea, 2 M Thiourea, 150 mM NaCl (Sigma)), reduced with 50 mM DTT for 1 hr at 36°C and alkylated with 100 mM iodoacetamide for 1 hr at 36°C in the dark. The concentrated urea was diluted 12 times with 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate buffer and proteins were digested for 18 hr at 36°C using trypsin/LysC mixture (Promega) in 1:50 (w/w) enzyme to protein ratio. Protein digests were desalted on 10 × 4.0 mm C18 cartridge (Restek, cat# 917450210) using Agilent 1260 Bio-inert HPLC system with the fraction collector. Purified peptides were speed vacuum-dried and stored at −80°C until further processing.
Tandem Mass Tags (TMT) labeling was used to perform quantitative proteomics. Each TMT labeling reaction contains six labels to be multiplexed in a single MS run. Donor IDs were blinded, and samples were randomized to prevent TMT bias. Each TMT 6-plex set included one donor from each of the five age groups and one reference sample. 5 muscle samples 100 μg each corresponding to five different age groups and one separately prepared master reference sample were labeled with 6-plex tandem mass spectrometry tags using a standard TMT labeling protocol (Thermo Fisher). 200 femtomole of bacterial beta-galactosidase digest (SCIEX) was spiked into each sample prior to TMT labeling to control for labeling efficiency and overall instrument performance. Labeled peptides from six different TMT channels were combined into one experiment and fractionated.
High-pH RPLC fractionation and concatenation strategy
High-pH RPLC fractionation was performed on Agilent 1260 bio-inert HPLC system using 3.9 mm X 5 mm XBridge BEH Shield RP18 XP VanGuard cartridge and 4.6 mm X 250 mm XBridge Peptide BEH C18 column (Waters). Solvent composition was as follows: 10 mM ammonium formate (pH 10) as mobile phase (A) and 10 mM ammonium formate and 90% ACN (pH 10) as mobile-phase B.
TMT-labeled peptides prepared from the skeletal muscle tissues were separated using a linear organic gradient that went from 5% to 50% B in 100 min. Initially, 99 fractions were collected during each LC run at 1 min interval each. Three individual high-pH fractions were concatenated into 33 combined fractions with the 33 min interval between each fraction (fractions 1, 34, 67 = combined fraction 1, fractions 2, 35, 68 = combined fraction two and so on). Combined fractions were speed vacuum dried, desalted and stored at −80°C until final LC-MS/MS analysis.
LC-MS/MS analyses
Purified peptide fractions from skeletal muscle tissues were analyzed using UltiMate 3000 Nano LC Systems coupled to the Q Exactive HF mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific, San Jose, CA). Each fraction was separated on a 35 cm capillary column (3 μm C18 silica, Hamilton, HxSil cat# 79139) with 150 um ID on a linear organic gradient using 650 nl/min flow rate. Gradient went from 5% to 35% B in 205 min. Mobile phases A and B consisted of 0.1% formic acid in water and 0.1% formic acid in acetonitrile, respectively. Tandem mass spectra were obtained using Q Exactive HF mass spectrometer with the heated capillary temperature +280°C and spray voltage set to 2.5 kV. Full MS1 spectra were acquired from 300 to 1500 m/z at 120,000 resolution and 50 ms maximum accumulation time with automatic gain control [AGC] set to 3 × 106. Dd-MS2 spectra were acquired using dynamic m/z range with fixed first mass of 100 m/z. MS/MS spectra were resolved to 30,000 with 155 ms of maximum accumulation time and AGC target set to 2 × 105. Twelve most abundant ions were selected for fragmentation using 30% normalized high collision energy. A dynamic exclusion time of 40 s was used to discriminate against the previously analyzed ions.
Proteomics informatics
The mgf files generated (using MSConvert, ProteoWizard 3.0.6002) from the raw data from each sample fraction was searched with Mascot 2.4.1 and X!Tandem CYCLONE (2010.12.01.1) using the SwissProt Human sequences from Uniprot (Version Year 2015, 20,200 sequences, appended with 115 contaminants) database. The search engine was set with the following search parameters: TMT6plex lysine and n-terminus as fixed modifications and variable modifications of carbamidomethyl cysteine, deamidation of asparagine and glutamate, carbamylation of lysine and n-terminus and oxidized methionine. A peptide mass tolerance of 20 ppm and 0.08 Da, respectively, and two missed cleavages were allowed for precursor and fragment ions in agreement with the known mass accuracy of the instrument. Mascot and X!Tandem search engine results were analyzed in Scaffold Q+ 4.4.6 (Proteome Software, Inc, RRID:SCR_014345). The TMT channels’ isotopic purity was corrected according to the TMT kit.peptide and protein probability was calculated by PeptideProphet and ProteinProphet probability model. The PeptideProphet model fits the peptide-spectrum matches into two distributions, one an extreme value distribution for the incorrect matches, and the other a normal distribution for correct matches. The protein was filtered at thresholds of 0.01% peptide FDR, 1% protein FDR and requiring a minimum of 1 unique peptide for protein identification. We allow single peptide hits for two reasons: first, any peptide that is quantifiable is detected at least across 25% of all samples (n = 58); second, we identify proteins with more than one search engine, so the protein identification is confirmed at least twice, even for single-peptide hits. For these reasons, the even single peptides are unlikely to be random hits. As for single peptide quantification, the spectrum-to-spectrum variability is no higher between spectra from the same peptide than between spectra from different peptides from the same protein. Therefore, it is unlikely that there is any differential ‘bias’ in reporter ions from peptide to peptide. More importantly, TMT is taken as relative, not absolute, quantification. So even if there were such a bias, it would be the same across samples, so the relative quantification would not be affected. Reporter ion quantitative values were extracted from Scaffold and decoy spectra, contaminant spectra and peptide spectra shared between more than one protein were removed. Typically, spectra are shared between proteins if the two proteins share most of their sequence, usually for protein isoforms. Reporter ions were retained for further analyses if they were exclusive to only one protein, and they were identified in all six channels across each TMT set. Since we have multiple age group across each TMT experiment, we analyzed the proteins for missing reporter ion intensity.
For this analysis, the protein with missing reporter ion in some of the channels (not more than two channels) for each TMT experiment was identified and missing value imputation was performed using multiple imputation with chained equations (MICE) R library by predictive mean matching. Mean imputation was performed <0.01% in one or two TMT channels in most of the TMT experiments, except TMTset1 (the missing reporter ion for channel 5 is 0.03%). The reporter ion intensity from the proteins derived from the imputation method (on an average <10 proteins) were concatenated with reporter ion intensity identified in all six channels and further analysis performed using adjudicated values. The log2 transformed reporter ion abundance was normalized by median subtraction from all reporter ion intensity spectra belonging to a protein across all channels. Relative protein abundance was estimated by median of all peptides for a protein combined. Protein sample loading effects from sample preparations were corrected by median polishing, that is subtracting the channel median from the relative abundance estimate across all channels to have a median zero as described elsewhere. Quantified proteins were clustered together if they shared common peptides and corresponding gene names were assigned to each protein for simplicity and data representation. Annotation of the proteins were performed by manual curation and combining information from Uniprot, GO and PANTHER database. Further bioinformatics analysis was performed using R programming language (3.4.0) and the free libraries available on Bioconductor.
Linear mixed effect model and statistical analyses
Linear mixed regression model was implemented to examine age effects and the data was adjusted for physical activity, gender, race, bmi, type I and type II myosin fiber ratio and TMT mass spectrometry experiments. Protein significance from the regression model was determined with p-values derived from lmerTest. Partial Least Square analysis (PLS) was used to derive models with classification that maximized the variance between age groups. PLS loadings were derived from linear model adjusted protein results. The regression model was performed using R 3.3.4 with lme4 v1.1. library. Heat maps and hierarchical cluster analysis were performed using the non-linear minimization package in R. GraphPad PRISM 6.07 and R packages were used for statistical analysis and generation of figures. STRING analysis (10.5 version) was used for obtaining protein-protein interaction network. Enrichment analysis was performed by GeneSet Enrichment Analysis (GSEA) and PANTHER, the pathways were mapped and visualized by Cytoscape 3.0. One-way ANOVA, nonparametric, and chi-square tests (continuous and categorical variables) were used to test for sample differences between age groups.
RNA extraction and purification
Total RNA was prepared by lysing cell pellets (2 × 106) in 700 μl Qiazol and extracted using Qiagen miRNeasy mini kit according to the manufacturer’s recommendation (Qiagen Inc, CA) from the same samples (n = 54). Small ribosomal RNA was further depleted using Qiagen GeneRead rRNA Depletion Nano Kit. Total RNA quality and quantity was checked using RNA-6000 nano kits on the Agilent 2100-Bioanalyzer. 375 ng of high-quality RNA was used for first-strand and second-strand cDNA synthesis followed by single primer isothermal amplification (SPIA) using NuGEN Ovation RNA–Seq System V2 kits according to manufacturer’s protocol. This kit amplified both polyA-tailed and non-polyA tailed RNA and removed ribosomal RNA. The amplified cDNA was sheared using Bioruptor (Diagenode) to an average size of 150–250 bases. The sequencing library was prepared using Illumina ChIP-Seq kits according to the manufacturer’s protocol (Illumina, San Diego, CA). In short, the ends of the fragments were repaired using T4 DNA polymerase, E. coli DNA Pol I large fragment (Klenow polymerase), and T4 polynucleotide kinase (PNK) and an A-overhang was added to the 3’ end. Adapters were ligated to the DNA fragments and size-selected (250–350 bases) on a 4.5% agarose gel. An 18-cycle PCR amplification was performed followed by a second 4.5% agarose gel size selection before cluster generation in cbot2 and sequencing with Illumina Hiseq2500 sequencer using V4 reagents. Single-read sequencing was performed for 138 cycles and Real-Time Analysis (RTA) v1.18.66.3 generated the base-call files (BCL files). BCL files were de-multiplexed and converted to standard FASTQ files using bcl2fastq program (v2.17.1.14).
RNA-Seq quantification and splicing analysis
The quality of the bases was checked using FASTQC program (v11.2) before and after adapter removal and last base trimming by cutadapt program (v1.9). The cleaned FASTQ files were aligned, quantified and annotated to the human hg19 genome using Salmon with the concept of quasi-mapping with two phase inference procedure for gene model annotations. The GC bias corrected, quantified transcript isoform abundance values (TPM) were used for further computation of relative abundance of the events or transcripts isoforms known as percent spliced-in (PSI) by SUPPA. Since the variability of low-expressed genes between biological replicates were reported, the transcript data were filtered for the transcripts which were expressed in at least three donors per each age group. Thus, we excluded ~23% of the transcripts from total transcript quantification for further splicing analysis. Events coordinates are extracted from the Ensembl annotation (GRCh37.75) and alternative splicing events were generated. PSI values of alternative splicing events for each transcript from each sample (n = 53) were estimated and the PSI values showing a good agreement with the RNA seq data were kept for further analysis. The magnitude of the PSI change (differential splicing) across the age were calculated with a linear mixed model analysis performed on the PSI to estimate the age-related splicing changes of the transcript isoform. The PSI regression model was adjusted with the aging confounders as same as described above for protein regression model except fiber ratio. For transcript data, we used RNA experiment batches as a random effect. The age beta coefficient for each alternative splicing event transcript PSI was reported as the magnitude to the splicing event-specific PSI change with age. Significance of the alternative splicing events was calculated by lmerTest and was reported if the observation had a p-value<0.05 at transcript level for age beta coefficient.
Age-association of proteins and transcripts
Proteins or transcripts either significantly upregulated or down regulated with age, present in 50% of the samples or at least in three samples for each age group, and significant (p<0.05) were considered as age-associated. Age-association was measured by linear mixed model adjusted for confounders of aging phenotype either in protein analysis or in RNAseq analysis and were further filtered for significance calculation. Age beta coefficient for each protein or transcript were calculated from log2 normalized data on which a mixed linear regression model was applied. Thus, the age beta coefficient represents the mean log2 fold expression per year of age. LmerTest was used for calculating p-values from t-tests via Satterthwaite’s degrees of freedom method. Any protein or transcript was represented as age-associated if the p-value for the protein or transcript was <0.05. p-Values for multiple comparisons were adjusted using Benjamini-Hochberg method in R and adjusted p-values were reported on related tables (figure source data). Age-associated proteins and age-associated alternatively spliced transcripts were further analyzed into two categories, either age-association beta coefficient (<0) was under represented with age--indicating a decrease in the abundance of the protein with a year of age or age-association beta coefficient (>0) was over represented with age-indicating the abundance of the protein was increased with a year of age. For simplicity of reporting, we calculated the enrichment of these proteins/transcripts over the total age-associated protein/transcripts and reported as underrepresented and overrepresented with age.
Data availability
The mass spectrometry proteomics data have been deposited to the ProteomeXchange Consortium via the PRIDE partner repository with the dataset identifier PXD011967. RNASeq data is deposited in GEO (GSE129643).