ABSTRACT:
Background
Immune checkpoint inhibitors (ICIs) have significantly improved the outcome in metastatic cutaneous melanoma (CM). However, therapy response is limited to subgroups of patients and clinically useful predictive biomarkers are lacking.
Methods
To discover treatment-related systemic changes in plasma and potential biomarkers associated with treatment outcome, we analyzed serial plasma samples from 24 patients with metastatic CM, collected before and during ICI treatment, with mass-spectrometry-based global proteomics (high-resolution isoelectric focusing liquid chromatography–mass spectrometry (HiRIEF LC-MS/MS)) and targeted proteomics with proximity extension assays (PEAs). In addition, we analyzed plasma proteomes of 24 patients with metastatic CM treated with mitogen-activated protein kinase inhibitors (MAPKis), to pinpoint changes in protein plasma levels specific to the ICI treatment. To detect plasma proteins associated with treatment response, we performed stratified analyses in anti-programmed cell death protein 1 (anti-PD-1) responders and non-responders. In addition, we analyzed the association between protein plasma levels and progression-free survival (PFS) by Cox proportional hazards models.
Results
Unbiased HiRIEF LC-MS/MS-based proteomics showed plasma levels’ alterations related to anti-PD-1 treatment in 80 out of 1160 quantified proteins. Circulating PD-1 had the highest increase during anti-PD-1 treatment (log2-FC=2.03, p=0.0008) and in anti-PD-1 responders (log2-FC=2.09, p=0.005), but did not change in the MAPKis cohort. Targeted, antibody-based proteomics by PEA confirmed this observation. Anti-PD-1 responders had an increase in plasma proteins involved in T-cell response, neutrophil degranulation, inflammation, cell adhesion, and immune suppression. Furthermore, we discovered new associations between plasma proteins (eg, interleukin 6, interleukin 10, proline-rich acidic protein 1, desmocollin 3, C-C motif chemokine ligands 2, 3 and 4, vascular endothelial growth factor A) and PFS, which may serve as predictive biomarkers.
Conclusions
We detected an increase in circulating PD-1 during anti-PD-1 treatment, as well as diverse immune plasma proteomic signatures in anti-PD-1 responders. This study demonstrates the potential of plasma proteomics as a liquid biopsy method and in discovery of putative predictive biomarkers for anti-PD-1 treatment in metastatic CM.
METHODS:
Methods
The research design is described in figure 1A. Details on methods are available in online supplementary additional file 1. Brief description is provided below.
Patient characteristics and plasma samples
Serial plasma samples were collected before treatment (pre-trm) and after the first treatment cycle (trm), before the second cycle, from 46 patients with metastatic (stage IV) CM treated with first-line ICIs (ie, anti-CTLA-4 and/or anti-PD-1) or MAPKis (MEKis and/or BRAFis). The blood samples were centrifuged and the plasma was stored at −70°C until further analysis.
The clinical data included age at treatment start, sex, baseline M-stage according to American Joint Committee on Cancer, Eighth Edition (M1a, M1b, M1c-d), baseline lactate dehydrogenase (LDH) levels, best response to treatment, date of disease progression, and/or date of death. 
Best response to treatment was based on clinical and/or radiological investigations (ie, CT, MRI and/or positron emission CT tomography), evaluated by oncologists and radiologists. Responders were defined as patients with complete response (CR) or stable disease (SD) or partial response (PR) (ie, decreased number and/or size of the existing metastases), without appearance of new lesions confirmed by imaging and/or clinical examination. Non-responders were defined as patients with lesions of increasing size or new lesions shown by imaging and/or clinical examination without any previous response to the therapy. Date of progression was recorded at the time of the confirmatory imaging. The PFS was defined as the time from treatment start until the date of confirmed progression or date of death. The OS was defined as the time from treatment start until date of death.
All patients but four were treated outside of clinical trials and were followed according to the standard clinical follow-up scheduled every fourth week, with radiological evaluation performed every 8–12 weeks. One patient received treatment within COLUMBUS/NCT01909453, one in COMBI-d/NCT01584648, and two in CheckMate 401/NCT02599402. The clinical trials have been reported. The patients within clinical trials were per protocol and were evaluated with imaging according to RECIST 1.1 (Response Evaluation Criteria in Solid Tumors, Version 1.1). 
Mass-spectrometry-based proteomics analysis
High-abundant protein depletion and in-solution digestion
The most abundant proteins in plasma were depleted with the Agilent Plasma 14 Multiple Removal System 4.6×100, which was set up on an Agilent HPLC system (Agilent Technologies). Protein concentration was determined by Bio-Rad DC Assay and equal amounts of each sample was subjected to in-solution digestions with LysC and trypsin.
Tandem mass tags labeling
Before labeling, equal amounts of peptide samples were pH adjusted using triethylammonium bicarbonate buffer, pH 8.5. The resulting peptide mixtures were labeled with isobaric tandem masstags (Thermo Scientific). Labeling efficiency was determined by liquid chromatography–massspectrometry (LC-MS/MS) before pooling of samples. Subsequently, sample clean-up was performed by solid phase extraction (SPE strata-X-C, Phenomenex). The labeling scheme can be found in online supplementary figure S1 additional file 1.
High-resolution isoelectric focusing with LC-MS/MS
The HiRIEF prefractionation method at peptide level was applied as previously described. Briefly, after sample clean-up by solid phase extraction (SPE strata-X-C, Phenomenex), the sample pool was subjected to peptide IEF-IPG (isoelectric focusing by immobilized pH gradient) in pI range 3–10 (1 mg). The freeze-dried peptide sample was dissolved in 250 µL rehydration solution containing 8M urea and allowed to adsorb to the gel strip by swelling overnight. The 24 cm linear gradient IPG strip (GE Healthcare) was incubated overnight in 8M rehydration solution containing 1% IPG pharmalyte pH 3–10 (GE Healthcare). After focusing, the peptides were passively eluted into 72 contiguous fractions with MilliQ water/35% acetonitrile/35% acetonitrile and 0.1% formic acid, using an in-house constructed IPG extractor robotics (GE Healthcare Biosciences AB, prototype instrument) into a 96-well plate (V-bottom, Greiner product no 651201). The resulting fractions were then freeze-dried and kept at −20°C until LC-MS/MS analysis and data searches (see online supplementary additional file 1).
Proteogenomics search pipeline/SpectrumAI
The HiRIEF LC-MS/MS data were searched in a previously described customized peptide database named varDB6 (15). The detected novel peptides were then curated using the SpectrumAI pipeline, described elsewhere. We then removed 11 peptides with n>D, D<N or Q>E, E<Q substitutions since the low mass difference between these amino acids increases the risk of co-isolation of isotopic variants in the HiRIEF LC-MS/MS analysis and generation of false positives.
Proximity extension assays
The plasma samples were additionally analyzed using PEAs at the clinical biomarkers’ facility at SciLifeLab, Uppsala, Sweden. In total, 92 human protein biomarkers (online supplementary table S0, additional file 2) were measured using Olink ImmunoOnc I panel (www.olink.com). The final assay readout is presented in normalized protein expression values, which is an arbitrary unit on a log2-scale where a higher value corresponds to a higher protein expression.
Statistical analysis
We included only anti-PD-1-treated patients and all MAPKi-treated patients in the analyses (online supplementary figure S1a, additional file 1), including only proteins detected in more than 50% and 80% of the observations in HiRIEF and PEA data, respectively. HiRIEF and PEA analyses were performed separately. All proteins were annotated with corresponding gene names. The protein quantifications in both HiRIEF LC-MS/MS and PEA data were log2-normalized. To analyze the change of protein levels in the plasma during treatment, we compared protein levels in trm plasma samples matched with the corresponding pre-trm samples, using a paired two-sided t test, at α=0.05.
To further investigate changes specific to response to anti-PD-1 treatment, we stratified anti-PD-1-treated patients into subgroups of anti-PD-1 responders (anti-PD-1-R) and anti-PD-1 non-responders (anti-PD-1-NR). Plasma proteomes between trm and pre-trm matched samples were compared in the separate strata of anti-PD-1-R and anti-PD-1-NR, using a paired two-sided t test. The change in plasma levels of each protein during treatment was quantified with the log2-fold-change (log2-FC). Furthermore, we compared the log2-FC in anti-PD-1-R with anti-PD-1-NR with a two-sided unpaired t test. To address uncertainty due to response categorization, we performed sensitivity analyses using only patients with CR (anti-PD-1-CR) as representative of responders.
We analyzed the association between protein plasma levels and PFS using Cox proportional hazards models, performing univariate and multivariate analyses (adjusting for clinical variables that were associated with PFS in the corresponding subgroup). Furthermore, in sensitivity multivariate analyses, we adjusted the Cox models for age, sex, and LDH levels (>normal vs normal), regardless of whether these clinical variables were initially associated with PFS.
Extensive details on agreement analysis, multiple testing, stratification, sensitivity analyses, and Cox models are available in online supplementary information additional file 1. All analyses were performed in R, V.3.5.1.