ABSTRACT:
Detailed observations of transcriptional, translational, and post-translational events in the human brain are essential to improving our understanding of its development, function, and vulnerability to disease. Here, we exploited label-free quantitative tandem mass-spectrometry proteomics to create an in-depth proteomic survey of adult human brain regions. Integration of protein data with existing whole-transcriptome sequencing (RNA-seq) from the BrainSpan project revealed varied patterns of protein:RNA relationships with generally increased magnitudes of protein abundance differences between brain regions compared to RNA. Many of the differences amplified in protein data were reflective of cyto-architectural and functional variation between brain regions. Comparing structurally similar cortical regions revealed significant differences in the abundance of receptor-associated and resident plasma membrane proteins that were not readily observed in the RNA expression data.
METHODS:
Online methods
Tissue procurement
This study was conducted using frozen post-mortem human brain specimens from a number of tissue collections facilitated by the Brainspan and psychENCODE consortia - see Kang et al for specific sample handling and preservation details. Briefly, tissue was collected after obtaining parental or next of kin consent and with approval by the institutional review boards at the Yale School of Medicine, the National Institutes of Health (NIH), and at each institution from which tissue specimens were obtained. Tissue was handled in accordance with ethical guidelines and regulations for the research use of human brain tissue set forth by the NIH (http://bioethics.od.nih.gov/humantissue.html) and the WMA Declaration of Helsinki (http://www.wma.net/en/30publications/10policies/b3/index.html). Appropriate informed consent was obtained and all available non-identifying information was recorded for each specimen. Specimens range in age from one year post conception to 40 years. The postmortem interval (PMI) was defined as hours between time of death and time when tissue samples were frozen. To ensure appropriate representation of the dissected sample region, frozen samples were pulverized in liquid nitrogen using a ceramic mortar and pestle.
Of the 16 brain regions profiled in Brainspan, seven regions that showed the largest interregional differences in gene expression by RNA-seq were selected: cerebellum (CBC), striatum (STR), mediodorsal thalamic nucleus (MD), amygdala (AMY), hippocampus (HIP), primary visual cortex (V1C), and dorsolateral prefrontal cortex (DFC). Developmental samples spanned early infancy (1 year post conception; developmental period 8) to adulthood (42 years; developmental period 13); the subjects were a near equal mix of males and females (Fig 1A; Table S1). No statistical methods were used to pre-determine sample sizes but our sample sizes are similar to those reported in Sharma et al.
Sample dissections
DFC was sampled from approximate border between the anterior and middle third of the medial frontal gyrus. DFC corresponds approximately to Brodmann areas (BA) 9 and 46.
V1C was sampled from the area surrounding the calcarine fissure. Only samples in which the stria of Gennari could be recognized were included. V1C corresponds to BA 17 or the primary visual cortex.
HIP was sampled from the middle third of the retrocommissural hippocampal formation, located on the medial side of the temporal lobe. Sampled areas always contained dentate gyrus and the cornu ammonis.
AMY - the whole amygdala was dissected.
STR includes the head of the caudate nucleus and the putamen, separated by the internal capsule and ventrally connected to the nucleus accumbens.
MD - the whole mediodorsal nucleus of the thalamus (MD) was sampled from the dorsal and medial thalamus. Small quantities of surrounding thalamic nuclei may be present in the samples.
CBC was sampled from the lateral part of the posterior lobe. The sampled area contained all three layers of cerebellar cortex and underlying white matter but not the deep cerebellar nuclei.
Please see the supplement of Kang et al for more detailed descriptions of the dissections of the regional samples. Briefly, the dissections were as follows: 
Sample preparation
Frozen powdered brain samples were weighed and added to lysis buffer (8 M Urea, 0.4 M ammonium bicarbonate, Complete Protease inhibitor (Roche)) at 1:10 weight:volume. Samples were homogenised by sonication, and cleared by centrifugation at 14,000 rpm, 4°C, 10 min on a desktop centrifuge. Lysates were quantified by BCA assay, and adjusted to 100 µg protein in 50 µL 8 M Urea, 0.4 M ammonium bicarbonate. pH was confirmed to be ~8. Dithiothreitol (45 mM at 1/10th sample volume) was added to lysates for 30 min at 37°C, followed by addition of iodoacetamide (100 mM at 1/10th sample volume) for 30 min in the dark at room temperature. Samples were diluted to 2 M urea with deionised water, before addition of trypsin at 1:20 trypsin:protein ratio. Proteins were digested for 16 hours at 37°C. The digestion was quenched by adjusting the pH to below 3 by the addition of 20% trifluoroacetic acid, and desalted using C18 Macro Spin Columns (Nest Group) according to the manufacturer’s instructions. Peptides eluted from the column were dried in a SpeedVac and stored at −20°C. Dried peptides were dissolved in 3.5% formic acid (FA) / 0.1% trifluoroacetic acid (TFA), and peptide concentrations were estimated from A280 absorbance using a Thermo Scientific Nanodrop 2000. Aliquots were diluted accordingly with additional 0.1% TFA to a final concentration of 0.04 µg/µl, with 0.2 µg loaded on column for mass spectrometric analysis. This procedure was used for both fractionated and single-shot runs.
Fractionation of samples
Master region pools were produced by adding 40 µg of homogenate from each of the adult (period 13) subjects, to make 200 µg total per region. Pooled lysates were processed for proteomic analysis as described above. For the fractionated samples, peptides were first dissolved in 53 µL 0.1% TFA and injected onto a Waters ACQUITY UPLC (BEH) C18 column (130 Angstrom, 1.7 µm, 2.1 mm id × 100 mm) at a flow rate of 0.4 mL/min. An orthogonal ‘high pH reverse phase separation was carried out (using buffers A:100% water with 10 mM ammonium acetate, pH 10; & B: 90% water/10% acetonitrile (ACN) with 10 mM ammonium acetate, pH 10) with a gradient 0.0 min - 2% B, 2.19 min - 2% B, 19.83 min −37% B, 28.65 min - 75% B, 33.06 min - 98% B, 34.53 min - 98% B, 37.47 min - 2% B, and 40 min - 2% B to separate the peptides. 48 fractions were collected from each brain region and were then pooled based on their estimated concentration from analysis of the chromatogram into 15 pools. Each pool was subsequently analysed individually by LC MS/MS.
Mass-spectrometry analysis (LC MS/MS)
For both the pooled fractionated and single shot quantitative runs, MS analyses were performed on a Q Exactive Plus mass spectrometer (ThermoFisher Scientific) coupled online to a Waters nanoAcquity UPLC in ‘low pH’ condition. Peptides were separated over a 180-min gradient run using a Waters Symmetry C18 trap (1.7 µm, 180 µm × 20 mm) and a ACQUITY UPLC PST (BEH) C18 column (130 Angstrom, 1.7 µm × 75 µm id × 250 mm) at 37°C. Trapping was carried out for 3 min at 5 µL/min, 99% Buffer A (99% water, 0.1% FA) and 1% Buffer B (0.1% FA in ACN) prior to eluting with linear gradients that reached 0.0 min – 1% B, 140 min - 30% B, 155 min - 40% B and 160 min - 85% B with a flow rate of 300 nL/min. MS1 (300 to 1500 m/z, target value 3E6, maximum ion injection times 45 ms) were acquired and followed by higher energy collisional dissociation based fragmentation (normalised collision energy 28). A resolution of 70,000 at m/z 200 was used for MS1 scans, and up to 20 dynamically chosen, most abundant, precursor ions were fragmented (isolation window 1.7 m/z). The MS2 scans were acquired at a resolution of 17,500 at m/z 200 (target value 1E5, maximum ion injection times 100 ms). Samples were run in regional blocks, with control samples interspersed throughout to allow for correction of batch effects.
Data analysis
Data collection and analysis were not performed blind to the conditions of the experiments. No samples were excluded from the analysis. Mass spectra were processed using MaxQuant (v1.5.2.1). Spectra were searched against the full set of human protein sequences annotated in Gencode (version 21; hg38) using the Andromeda search engine. This search included a fixed modification, cysteine carbamidomethylation, and two variable modifications, N-acetylation and methionine oxidation. Peptides shorter than 7 amino-acids were not considered for further analysis due to lack of uniqueness and a 1% false-discovery rate (FDR) was used to filter poor identifications at both the peptide and protein level. Where possible, peptide identification information was matched between runs of the fractionated and single-shot samples within MaxQuant. This exploited the accurate mass and retention times across liquid chromatography (LC)-MS runs to infer the identity of a peptide in a particular run in which the precursor ion was detected but was not selected for identification by MS2.
For the single shot spatio-temporal analysis of human brain samples, mass spectra were matched between the fractionated brain-region-specific samples (Table S2) and the adult single shot runs. Due to the number of extra protein IDs gained using this feature, we endeavoured to estimate the likelihood of protein misidentification by the match between runs (MBR) feature. We took the 148 proteins observed only in the CBC fractionated data (“CBC specific”), and counted how many times, and by what means these same proteins were identified in the adult single shot samples (Table S11). Only 49 of these “CBC-specific” proteins were identified by any means in the single shot samples, a reflection of the substantially increased depth of fractionated vs single shot proteomics. As would likely be expected in this small subset of proteins, there were more identifications by all methods in the CBC single shot samples. 3.4% of possible observations from non-CBC single shot samples occurred only at the MS1 match level. These observations may reflect a false identification of an isobaric “imposter” peptide by the MBR feature, or may simply reflect a peptide missed by the fractionated proteomic profiling of the other regions. Although it is not possible to confidently differentiate between these two possibilities, we estimate an upper limit of 3.4% for the protein misidentification rate, and a 1.8% rate at which proteins were undetected in the non-CBC fractionated runs.
To be included in the region-specific dataset, peptides were required to have at least 2 MS/MS scans. Protein identification required at least one unique or razor peptide per protein group. Quantification in MaxQuant was performed using the label free quantification (maxLFQ) algorithm. The mass spectrometry proteomics data have been deposited to the ProteomeXchange Consortium (http://proteomecentral.proteomexchange.org) via the PRIDE partner repository with the data set identifier PXD005445.
Sample preparation - RNA extraction, library preparation & sequencing
Details of tissue handling, RNA sample preparation, library construction, and sequencing can be found in the white paper at: http://help.brain-map.org/download/attachments/3506181/Transcriptome_Profiling.pdf
RNA sequencing alignment and expression quantification
quantMode: TranscriptomeSAM
outFilterMismatchNoverLmax: 0.1
outFilterMultimapNmax: 50
RNA-seq reads were re-aligned and re-quantified using a custom analysis pipeline. This involved filtering reads against known laboratory contaminant sequences in UniVec, before further filtering by explicit alignment to the human 5.8S and 45S rRNA sequences. Reads aligned to these sequences were removed. Reads that did not map to UniVec or rRNA were aligned against the human genome (hg38) and known splice junctions (gencode v21) using the STAR aligner (v2.4.2a), using default parameters with the exception of the following: 
Gene expression values (Reads Per Kilobase of exon model per Million mapped; RPKM) were computed from the aligned reads using RSEQTools. The exon model used was the composite (union of all overlapping exons) of all transcripts for each gene; a description of this composite model is available both in the RSEQTools paper and in the whitepaper above.
Downstream analysis
All downstream analysis was performed using R/Bioconductor.
Normalisation / pre-processing
Human mass spectrometry data were obtained from the ‘proteinGroups.txt’ and ‘peptides.txt’ tables output from MaxQuant. As spectra were mapped to gencode isoforms, Ensembl transcript IDs were generalised to their corresponding Ensembl gene IDs. Entries corresponding only to reverse DB hits or to common mass-spectrometry contaminants were removed. Label Free Quantitation (LFQ) for the single shot samples were extracted and duplicated rows (redundant gene entries) were summed. Sample LFQ distributions were log10 transformed, scaled by their 75th percentile, and batch corrected using ComBat (Figure S4). Batch correction was employed as the single shot samples were prepared and run in two discrete batches due to sample availability. These final, normalised, LFQ data are available in Table S4.
Human mRNA-seq RPKM distributions were log10 transformed, quantile normalised, and batch corrected, again using ComBat. Expression data were further filtered to remove nuisance high abundance small-RNA biotypes (miRNA, misc_RNA, snRNA, snoRNA, rRNA, Mt_rRNA, Mt_tRNA). This was only important for the RNA/protein coverage comparison in Figure 1 as these nuisance biotypes led to a large skew to the RNA expression distribution that is not relevant to the analysis presented here. For the RNA-seq and protein comparison, RNA-seq expression data were used to resolve genes for which the peptide alignment was ambiguous. Briefly, considering a set of peptides that map equally well to multiple different genes, if the RNA-seq could rule out one or more of these genes based on low abundance (<10% of the sum of the RNA abundance over all of these genes), then it was removed from the protein identifier. Subsequently, if the remaining ambiguous genes were also roughly equally expressed by RNA, then the RNA-seq data for these genes was summed to match the protein entry.
Region averaged mouse mass-spectrometry data were obtained from the supplement of Sharma et al. Human:Mouse 1:1 orthologues were obtained from BioMart (Ensembl Genes 85). Ortholog gene pairs were defined by matching gene-symbols in the human with those in the mouse dataset.
Statistics
Normalised LFQ human protein and RNA data (5141 proteins, 77 samples from 17 individuals) were subjected to a gene-wise linear model to compute the coefficients of development period (continuous variable, 6 periods) and brain region (discrete variable, 7 regions). Data distribution was assumed to be normal but this was not formally tested. Statistical significance was computed by two-way ANOVA and p-values were corrected for multiple hypothesis tests using Bonferroni’s method. A threshold of p<0.05 was used to define significantly differentially expressed (DEX) genes across either developmental period or brain region, with an additional criteria of a minimum fold change of 2 for genes included in GO analysis.
DEX genes over developmental period or brain region were clustered using the R package ‘dynamicTreeCut’. Euclidean distances between genes were clustered using the ‘hclust’ function (method=‘average’) prior to cluster discretisation using a dynamic tree cut (method=‘hybrid’, deepSplit=T, pamStage=T, maxPamDist=0). The minimum cluster size was varied between the different gene sets to produce more easily interpretable results; for period-DEX proteins the minimum cluster membership was set to 2, for region-DEX proteins the minimum cluster membership was set to 10.
For the protein/RNA comparison, KS tests were performed to assess whether RNA:protein correlation was altered in regionally DEX genes (n=1776) versus all detected genes (n=5039). For the human/mouse comparison, only those data from the 5 regions (CBC, STR, MD, HIP, and frontal cortex: dorsolateral PFC in primate, PFC in mouse) and 4052 genes represented in both datasets were used (1517 genes were region significant). Human differential expression analysis was performed on this subset of genes and regions in the same manner as before. For the mouse, equivalent replicate-level data were unavailable from the supplement of Sharma et al., so instead human-equivalent coefficients were computed from the region-averaged data available in their Supplementary Information. This simply involved a re-scaling of the reported abundances from log2 to log10.
In order to assess gene-set enrichments in the regionally differentially expressed proteins and transcripts, we downloaded gene symbol to gene ontology terms and accessions for each of the three GO domains using the biomaRt package in R. All ontological analysis was performed using the R package topGO (http://www.mpi-sb.mpg.de/alexa) and all p-values corrected for multiple tests using the Benjamini Hochberg method. Briefly, genes were classified based on their RNA vs protein fold-change agreement in each region pair, visually summarised in Figure 5. We sought to identify enriched ontological terms in genes that either agree, partially agree, or disagree in the fold-change reported by RNA-seq and proteomics, including genes that appear highly differentially expressed in one of these assays but not the other. Only significantly differentially expressed genes were input (background) and the classification based on +/− 2-fold changes between region pairs.
We also classified each gene based on its consistency of RNA/protein fold-change agreement across all pairs of regions. For each gene, regions with fold-changes < 2 in both RNA and protein were discarded, and genes appearing in the same category (i.e. protein-only DEX) in more than 50% of the remaining region pairs were annotated as consistent, in this example, as ‘proteinOnly’. Ontological enrichment analysis was performed as before with the individual region pairs.
Finally, we sought to increase the scope and relevance of this enrichment analysis by including all hallmark, positional, BioCarta, KEGG, reactome, miRNAtargets, and TFtargets available in the Molecular Signatures Database (v5.2). Enrichments here were computed using Fisher’s Exact Tests and p-values again corrected for multiple comparisons using the Benjamini Hochberg method. Exact Ns for each functional enrichment test can be found in the “Annotated” and “Significant” columns of Figure S9.
To generate the network figures in S7 and S12 STRING criteria were set at “medium” stringency (0.4) and included all sources of interactions (Text mining, experiments, databases, co-expression, neighbourhood, gene fusion & co-occurrence). For the STR figure (S8), the p value survives when stringency is increased to “highest” (0.9). All enrichment analyses were performed using a background list of genes that were significantly differentially expressed as RNA or protein (this same list was used to generate the scatter plots).
Immunoblotting
Lysates prepared in 8 M Urea were separated by SDS-PAGE (4–20% tris-glycine gels, Life Technologies). Proteins were transferred onto 0.2 µM Nitrocellulose (Biorad). Primary antibodies used were anti mGluR2/3 (GRM2/3, EMD Millipore, 06–676, 1:1000), anti CB1 (CNR1, Cell Signalling, D5N5C, 1:1000), anti PDE4D (Millipore ABS22, 1:1000), anti TrkC (NTRK3, Cell Signalling, C44H5, 1:1000) and anti GAPDH (Calbiochem CB1001, 1:5000). The antibodies used have been validated for this assay in other species, but not in human brain. Comprehensive validation of antibodies for use in human brain tissue is extremely difficult, as discussed by the Antibody Validation Working group, but given that for all antibodies except TrKC the antibodies show a comparable pattern of expression to the LC-MS/MS data, and bands of the appropriate size, we can presume these antibodies are working appropriately. In TrkC’s case, the disagreement may depend on the epitope used by the antibody, drop out of peptides due to post translational modification, or a lack of sensitivity by the antibodies for a relatively modest change. The primary antibodies were visualized using anti mouse or rabbit HRP (Vector Laboratories, PI-2000 Ms, PI-1000 Rb 1:3000) and a ChemiDoc Imager (Biorad), or in the case of GAPDH, the Licor IRDye 800 anti-mouse secondary antibody (Rockland 610-102-041, 1:15,000) and a Licor Odyssey Infra Red Scanner. Bands were quantified using ImageJ, normalized within lane to GAPDH, and paired Student’s T-tests were performed using Prism 7 (n= 5 biological replicates per group, all data shown on blots/graphs).
A summary of important reproducibility related information from these methods can be found in the accompanying “Life Sciences Reporting Summary.”
Data Availability
The Mass spectrometry proteomics data have been deposited to the ProteomeXchange Consortium via the PRIDE partner repository with the data identifier PXD005445.
Code availability
Analysis code and the required input tables have been provided as a zipped Supplementary Software file. This large supplementary file (>600 MB unzipped) contains a readme file with system specific instructions for code running.
Accession Codes
PXD005445: https://www.ebi.ac.uk/pride/archive/