ABSTRACT:
Gene expression contributes to phenotypic traits and human disease. To date, comparatively less is known about regulators of protein abundance, which is also under genetic control and likely influences clinical phenotypes. However, identifying and quantifying allele-specific protein abundance by bottom-up proteomics is challenging since single nucleotide variants (SNVs) that alter protein sequence are not considered in standard human protein databases. To address this, we developed the GenPro software and used it to create personalized protein databases (PPDs) to identify single amino acid variants (SAAVs) at the protein level from whole exome sequencing. In silico assessment of PPDs generated by GenPro revealed only a 1% increase in tryptic search space compared to a direct translation of all human transcripts and an equivalent search space compared to the UniProtKB reference database. To identify a large unbiased number of SAAV peptides, we performed high-resolution mass spectrometry-based proteomics for two human post-mortem brain samples and searched the collected MS/MS spectra against their respective PPD. We found an average of ~117,000 unique peptides mapping to ~9,300 protein groups for each sample and of these 977 were unique variant peptides. We found that over 400 reference and SAAV peptide pairs were, on average, equally abundant in human brain by label-free ion intensity measurements and confirmed the absolute levels of three reference and SAAV peptide pairs using heavy labeled peptides standards coupled with parallel reaction monitoring (PRM). Our results highlight the utility of integrating genomic and proteomic sequencing data to identify sample-specific SAAV peptides and support the hypothesis that most alleles are equally expressed in human brain.
TOC image
METHODS:
Experimental Procedures
Tissue Homogenization and Digestion
We obtained fresh-frozen post-mortem human brain (dorsolateral prefrontal cortex; broadman area 9) from two cases from the Emory Brain Bank. Each tissue sample was processed as described with slight modification. Briefly, each tissue was individually weighed (approximately 0.1 g) and homogenized (Dounce homogenizer) in 500 μL of urea lysis buffer (8M urea, 50 mM Tris-HCl, pH 7.8), including both protease inhibitors (Roche) and the HALT (Pierce) phosphatase inhibitor cocktail, 0.6% (v/v). Samples were sonicated (Sonic Dismembrator, Fisher Scientific) 5 times for 5 sec with 15 sec intervals of rest at 30% amplitude to disrupt nucleic acids, and then centrifuged at 22,800 rcf at 4°C for 5 min. Protein concentration was determined by the bicinchoninic acid (BCA) method, and then samples were frozen at -80°C. Protein samples (1 mg) were treated with 1 mM dithiothreitol (DTT) at 37°C for 30 min, followed by 5 mM iodoacetamide (IAA) at 37°C for 30 min. Samples were first digested with 1:200 (w/w) lysyl endopeptidase (LysC; Wako) at 37°C for 4 h, and then diluted with 50 mM NH4HCO3 to a final concentration of 1.6 M urea and digested overnight with 1:50 (w/w) trypsin (Promega) at 37°C. For LysC digestion alone, samples were diluted with 50 mM NH4HCO3 to a final concentration of 0.6 M urea and digested overnight with 1:50 (w/w) lysyl endopeptidase (LysC). All peptides were desalted on C18 Sep-Pak (Waters Corporation) and lyophilized to dryness.
Electrostatic Repulsion-Hydrophilic Interaction Chromatography (ERLIC)
ERLIC fractionation was performed as previously described with slight modifications. We used the concatenated ERLIC pooled strategy as it was shown that the number of unique peptides identified in concatenated ERLIC is significantly higher than pooling adjacent fractions using the same LC-MS/MS gradient. Briefly, trypsin or LysC-derived peptides generated from 1 mg of protein were dissolved in 100 μL of 80% (v/v) loading buffer (10 mM NH4Ac, 85% ACN/1% acetic acid), injected completely with an auto-sampler, and fractionated using a PolyWAX LP anion-exchange column (200 × 3.2 mm, 5 μm, 300 Å; PolyLC, Columbia, MD) on an Agilent 1100 HPLC system monitored at 280 nm. Forty fractions were collected with a 66-min gradient of 100% mobile phase A (90% ACN/0.1% acetic acid) for 3 min, 0%–20% mobile phase B (30% ACN/0.1% FA) for 50 min, 20%–100% B for 5 min, followed by 8 min at 100% B at a flow rate of 0.3 ml/min. The 40 fractions were pooled into 20 fractions by combining in the following manner, (1, 40); (2, 39); (3, 38), and so on.
LC-MS/MS Analysis
An equal volume of each of the 20 ERLIC peptide fractions (LysC or trypsin) was re-suspended in loading buffer (0.1% formic acid, 0.03% trifluoroacetic acid, 1% acetonitrile), and peptide eluents were separated on a self-packed C18 (1.9 um Dr. Maisch, Germany) fused silica column (25 cm × 75 μM internal diameter (ID); New Objective, Woburn, MA) by a Dionex UltiMate 3000 RSLCnano system (ThermoFisher Scientific) and monitored on an Thermo Orbitrap Fusion mass spectrometer (ThermoFisher Scientific). Elution was performed over a 120-min gradient at a rate of 300 nl/min with buffer B ranging from 1% to 90% (buffer A: 0.1% formic acid in water, buffer B: 0.1 % formic in acetonitrile). The mass spectrometer cycle was programmed to sequence at top speed with a cycle time of 5 sec. For samples digested with both LysC and trypsin, the MS scans were collected at a resolution of 60,000 (300–1800 m/z range, 200,000 AGC, 50 ms maximum ion time). For samples digested with only LysC, the MS scans were collected with the same resolution and ion time but with a mz range of 350–1500 and an AGC of 500,000. All HCD MS/MS spectra were acquired at a resolution of 17,500 (0.7 m/z isolation width, 30% collision energy, 20,000 AGC target, 35 ms maximum ion time) in the Orbitrap. Dynamic exclusion was set to exclude previously sequenced peaks for 20 sec within a 10-ppm isolation window. Only those precursors with charge state 2–6 were sampled for MS/MS. All raw mass spectrometry files and matched peptides will be made public on Synapse, https://www.synapse.org/#!Synapse:syn6126101.
Whole-Exome Sequencing
We extracted genomic DNA from fresh-frozen brain tissue using a Gentra PureGene kit (Qiagen, Germany) per the manufacturer’s protocol. Whole-exome sequencing was performed using the SeqCap EZ Exome v2 Human Exome Capture Kit (Roche, Switzerland) according to the manufacturer’s protocol, with 100-bp paired-end sequencing on an Illumina HiSeq 2000 instrument to an average read depth of 100X. Raw sequencing reads were mapped to the whole human genome (GRCh38) using the PEMapper and variant sites were identified using PECaller with a theta of 0.001 and probability to call a variant site of 95% within the approximately 32 million bases that constitute the consensus coding domain.
Personalized Protein Database Construction
The GenPro software is an open-source application developed to generate PPDs. A complete description of the software is available at https://github.com/wingolab-org/GenPro where it may be downloaded. Briefly, prior to creating PPDs a binary database for the organism of interest must be created. This database contains knowledge of transcripts (i.e., translation start, translation stop, and exon boundaries) and genomic sequence. GenPro can create a binary database for the following organisms: Homo sapiens, M. musculus, D. melanogaster, C. elegans, or S. cerevisiae. The software generates the reference proteome through in silico in-frame translation of each transcript in the binary database (Supplementary Figure 1). To generate a PPD for a given sample, the software reads variants from either a VCF- or SNP-formatted file, and creates all novel proteins for each missense SNV on a per sample basis. Each variant protein is then digested in silico with a user-specified protease and only if the variant protein results in one or more novel peptides (i.e., peptides not present in the reference proteome) is the variant protein added to the PPD. The user may impose a maximum or minimum length requirement on the peptides to consider (e.g., default minimum and maximum peptide length of 6 and 40). A final PPD consists of all full-length translated proteins (reference and variant) are written to a single FASTA file that may be used as input for Proteome Discoverer 2.0 software (Thermo Scientific, Bremen, Germany). The FASTA header encodes information about whether the transcript is reference or variant, and for variant proteins, it encodes the location(s) and amino acid substitution of the variant(s).
For this study, we used the human genome (GRCh38) and UCSC knownGene transcripts (http://genome.ucsc.edu/cgi-bin/hgTrackUi?db=hg38&g=knownGene, accessed: 4/15/2014), which aimed to be a complete set of well-described genes and incorporates data from RefSeq, GenBank, the Consensus Coding Domain Project, and comparative genomics. We use trypsin and LysC protease-specific settings to construct the PPDs with a minimum and maximum peptide length of 6 and 40, respectively. The upper length requirement was chosen to limit database size and because under the same experimental conditions we observed that only approximately 1% of all peptides sequenced are longer than 40 amino acids (data not shown).
Database Searching
MS/MS data obtained were searched against personal protein databases, which are described in results 3.1, and the UniProt Knowledgebase (UniProtKB) containing both Swiss-Prot and TrEMBL human reference protein sequences (90,411 target sequences downloaded April 21, 2015) using the SEQUEST algorithm through the Proteome Discoverer 2.0 platform (Thermo Scientific, Bremen, Germany). Searching parameters against a target-decoy database included mass tolerance of precursor ions (±10 ppm), 0.05 Da mass tolerance for product ions, fully tryptic or LysC restriction, dynamic modifications for oxidized Met (+15.9949 Da), deaminated Asn and Gln (+0.98480 Da), protein N-terminal acetylation (+42.03670 Da), static modification for carbamidomethyl Cys (+57.0215 Da), 4 maximal modification sites, and a maximum of 2 missed cleavages. Only b and y ions were considered for scoring, and the embedded Percolator algorithm was used to filter the peptide spectral matches (PSMs) to achieve a false-discovery rate (FDR) of <1%. Peptide and protein grouping were followed per Proteome Discoverer’s algorithm while applying a strict maximum parsimony principle. For variant-containing peptide identification, we applied the following filters on identified PSMs: amino acid changes that could be due to either spontaneous N/Q-deamination (+0.98 Da) or leucine (L)-to-isoleucine (I) coding changes were not considered.
Validation of Variant Peptides with Synthetic Standards and Label-free Quantification of Allele-Specific Abundance
Custom Peptide Synthesis (ThermoFisher Scientific) was used to validate variant peptides harboring single amino acid substitutions in PLEC, HSPA12A, GAA, TJP1, APOA4, and MINK1. All peptides were mixed together at equal weight (1 μg total) and analyzed by LC-MS/MS using a targeted (data-independent acquisition) method on a high-resolution Q-Exactive Orbitrap. Each cycle consisted of one MS1 scan for each precursor collected at a resolution of 70,000 followed by 10 MS/MS (2 m/z isolation width, 30% collision energy, 50,000 AGC target, 50-ms maximum ion time) at 17,500 resolution targeting predefined precursor ion masses (m/z) derived from the matched variants peptides from human brain. MS/MS HCD spectra for targeted synthetic variant peptides were searched by SEQUEST against the personalized protein database (target-decoy) to confirm identification using the same search and peptide filtering parameters as described above. Estimates of the relative abundance of SAAV and reference peptides in human brain were determined from the chromatographic peak area calculation in Proteome Discover (Thermo Scientific, Bremen, Germany) of the extracted ion chromatograms (XICs) corresponding to the variant and reference peptides with the same charge state (m/z). The stoichiometry or allele-specific abundance was quantified as a ratio of the chromatographic peak area of the variant peptide to the reference peptides. A peptide precursor mass tolerance of ±4 ppm for extracted ion chromatograms and a minimum signal-to-noise threshold of 1.0 was used as default parameters in Proteome Discoverer. The log2 ratios of the peak area for the reference and variant were plotted versus the average of the log2 intensities (i.e., as an MA plot). For the plot, we calculated a sliding window standard deviation (SD) and plot ± the 2-fold change lines in red using R (v3.2.3, 2015-12-10). All statistical testing was performed using built-in functions implemented in the same version of R.
Parallel Reaction Monitoring (PRM) for Absolute Quantification of Allelic Abundance
Since the above XIC-based approach assumes similar ionization efficiency of SAAVs and reference peptides, we quantified allele-specific expression by PRM analysis. This was performed using a Q-Exactive-Plus hybrid quadrupole-orbitrap mass spectrometer (ThermoFisher Scientific), operated under Xcalibur software 3.0.63, equipped with a nanoelectrospray ion source and coupled to a nano-Acquity system (Waters). Tryptic peptides were loaded and elute off a self-packed 1.9 um C18 analytical column (New Objective, 35 cm × 75 μm inner diameter; 360 μm outer diameter). Elution was performed over a 250-min gradient at a rate of 210 nl/min with buffer B ranging from 1% to 80% (buffer A: 0.1% formic acid with 5% DMSO in water, buffer B: 0.1 % formic with 5% DMSO in 80% acetonitrile). The Q-Exactive-Plus MS was operated with the PRM mode using an inclusion list, consisting of m/z of targeted peptides shown in Supplementary Figure 2, a normalized collision energy of 30 was employed for fragmentation. Typical MS conditions included: spray voltage, 2.6kV; heated capillary temperature, 350°C; isolation windows 1.6 m/z with an offset 0.5 m/z; the resolution set to 17,500 at m/z 200; automatic gain control (AGC) target at 2×105. The heavy isotope labeled peptides were purchased from ThermoFisher Scientific (AQUA-Basic). The dynamic range was determined from lower end and upper end of calibration curve of synthesized peptides, which were spiked into tryptic digests of human brain. Heavy stable isotope labelled peptides were spiked into digested human brain samples (1μg/μl) in 100 fmol concentration. The linear range quantitation of heavy isotope labelled peptides is shown in Supplementary Figure 3.
Before importing Thermo raw files into Skyline software (Version 3.6), a spectral library of heavy stable isotope labelled peptides was built. Heavy peptides were mixed in 100 fmol concentration and then analyzed by Q-Exactive-Plus mass spectrometer with the same normalized collision energy as PRM analysis described above. The raw file was processed by Maxquant (Version 1.5.7.4), using a human whole proteome sequence FASTA file was downloaded from UniProt (UP000005640, date: 2016-02-16), with variant protein sequences concatenated to the file. The MS/MS spectrum of each heavy peptide is shown in Supplementary Figure 2. For each peptide, the six strongest product ions were selected in Skyline. The Skyline software settings included: Precursor mass analyzer, Centroided; MS1 mass accuracy of 20 ppm; Product mass analyzer, Centroided; MS/MS Mass accuracy of 20 ppm; Retention time filtering, include all matching scans. All product ion peak areas were calculated by Skyline, and endogenous peptides quantification was based on the normalized peak areas of at least 4 product ions.