ABSTRACT:
Abstract
Genome‐, transcriptome‐ and proteome‐wide measurements provide insights into how biological systems are regulated. However, fundamental aspects relating to which human proteins exist, where they are expressed and in which quantities are not fully understood. Therefore, we generated a quantitative proteome and transcriptome abundance atlas of 29 paired healthy human tissues from the Human Protein Atlas project representing human genes by 18,072 transcripts and 13,640 proteins including 37 without prior protein‐level evidence. The analysis revealed that hundreds of proteins, particularly in testis, could not be detected even for highly expressed mRNAs, that few proteins show tissue‐specific expression, that strong differences between mRNA and protein quantities within and across tissues exist and that protein expression is often more stable across tissues than that of transcripts. Only 238 of 9,848 amino acid variants found by exome sequencing could be confidently detected at the protein level showing that proteogenomics remains challenging, needs better computational methods and requires rigorous validation. Many uses of this resource can be envisaged including the study of gene/protein expression regulation and biomarker specificity evaluation.
METHODS:
Materials and Methods
Human tissue specimen
The 29 human tissue samples used for mRNA and protein expression analysis were obtained from the Department of Pathology, Uppsala University Hospital, Uppsala, Sweden, as part of the sample collection governed by the Uppsala Biobank (www.uppsalabiobank.uu.se/en/). All tissue samples were collected and handled using standards developed in the Human Protein Atlas (www.proteinatlas.org) and in accordance with Swedish laws and regulations. Tissue samples were anonymized in agreement with approval and advisory reports from the Uppsala Ethical Review Board (References # 2002‐577, 2005‐338 and 2007‐159 (protein) and # 2011‐473 (RNA)). The need for informed consent was waived by the ethics committee. The list of all tissues along with corresponding donor information, sample preparation and measurement information is provided in Table EV1.
RNA sequencing
Procedures for RNA extraction from tissues, library preparation and sequencing have already been described (Uhlén et al, 2015). Briefly, pieces of frozen human tissue were embedded in optimal cutting temperature (OCT) compound and stored at −80°C. Cryosections were cut and stained with haematoxylin‐eosin for microscopical confirmation of tissue quality and proper representativity. 5–10 cryosections (10 μm) were transferred to RNAse‐free tubes for extraction of total RNA using the RNeasy Mini Kit (Qiagen). RNA quality was analysed with an Agilent 2100 Bioanalyzer system with the RNA 6000 Nano LabChip Kit (Agilent Biotechnologies). Only samples of high‐quality RNA (RNA integrity number ≥ 7.5) were used for mRNA sample preparation and sequencing. The mRNA strands were fragmented using Fragmentation Buffer (Illumina), and the templates were used to construct cDNA libraries using a TruSeq RNA Sample Prep Kit (Illumina). Gene expression was assessed by deep sequencing of cDNA on Illumina HiSeq 2000/2500 system (Illumina) for paired‐end reads with a read length of 2 × 100 bases. RNA sequencing data were aligned against the human reference genome (GRCh38, v83) using Tophat2.0.8b. FPKM (fragments per kilobase of exon model per million mapped reads) values were calculated using Cufflinks v2.1.1 as a proxy for transcript expression level. The FPKM values of each gene were summed up in an individual sample, and median normalization was applied to evaluate genes expression levels between tissues. A cut‐off value of 1 FPKM was used as a lower limit for detection across all tissues.
Sample preparation and off‐line hydrophilic strong anion chromatography (hSAX)
Fresh frozen human tissue samples (parallel cryosections cut simultaneously as those used for RNA extraction, described above) were prepared for LC‐MS/MS as described previously (Ruprecht et al, 2017). Briefly, tissue slices were homogenized in lysis buffer (50 mM Tris/HCl, pH 7.6, 8 M urea, 10 mM tris(2‐carboxyethyl)phosphin hydrochloride, 40 mM chloroacetamide, protease and phosphatase inhibitors) by bead milling (Precellys 24, Bertin Instruments, France; 5,500 rpm, 2 × 20 s, 10 s pause). Protein content was determined using the Bradford method (Coomassie (Bradford) Protein Assay Kit, Thermo Scientific), and 300 μg of the protein extract was used for in‐solution digestion with trypsin. For this, the sample was diluted with 50 mM Tris/HCl to a final urea concentration of 1.6 M, and trypsin was added at a 50:1 (w/w) protein‐to‐protease ratio. After 4 h of digestion at 37°C, another aliquot of trypsin was added to reach a final 25:1 (w/w) protein‐to‐protease ratio and the sample was incubated overnight at 37°C. In addition, the tonsil sample was subjected to digestion using LysC, ArgC, GluC, AspN, LysN and chymotrypsin (LysC was from Wako, Japan; the other proteases were from Promega, USA). 300 μg of the protein extract prepared as described above was applied in each digestion. The buffers were prepared according to the manufacturer's protocols. The resulting peptides were desalted and concentrated on C18 StageTips (Rappsilber et al, 2007) and fractionated via hSAX off‐line chromatography exactly as described previously (Ruprecht et al, 2017). The details of digestion for each tissue are given in the Appendix Table S1.
On‐line liquid chromatography–tandem mass spectrometry (LC‐MS/MS)
Quantitative label‐free LC‐MS/MS analysis was performed using a Q Exactive Plus mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Bremen, Germany) coupled on‐line to a nanoflow LC system (NanoLC‐Ultra 1D+, Eksigent, USA). Peptides were delivered to a trap column (0.1 × 2 cm, packed with 5 μm ReproSil‐Pur AQ, Dr. Maisch GmbH, Germany) at a flow rate of 5 μl/min for 10 min in 100% solvent A (0.1% formic acid, FA, in HPLC‐grade water). After 10 min of loading and washing, peptides were transferred to a 40 cm (75‐μm inner diameter) analytical column, packed with 3 μm, ReproSil‐Pur C18‐AQ, Dr. Maisch GmbH, Germany) and separated using a 110‐min gradient from 2% to 32% solvent B (0.1% FA, 5% dimethyl sulfoxide in acetonitrile, ACN) at a flow rate of 300 nL/min. Full scans (m/z 360–1,300) were acquired at a resolution of 70,000 using an AGC target value of 3e6 and a maximum ion injection time of 100 ms. Internal calibration was performed using the signal of a DMSO cluster as lock mass (Hahne et al, 2013). Tandem mass spectra were generated for up to 20 precursors by higher‐energy collisional dissociation (HCD) using a normalized collision energy of 25%. The dynamic exclusion was set to 35 s. Fragment ions were detected at a resolution of 17,500 using an AGC target value of 1e5 and a maximum ion injection time of 50 ms.
LysC‐, ArgC‐, GluC‐, AspN‐, LysN‐ and chymotrypsin‐digested samples were measured on a Q Exactive HF mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Bremen, Germany) coupled on‐line to a nanoflow LC system (NanoLC‐Ultra 1D+, Eksigent, USA). Full scan MS spectra were acquired at 60,000 resolution and a maximum ion injection time of 25 ms. Tandem mass spectra were generated for up to 15 peptide precursors and fragments detected at a resolution of 15,000. The MS2 AGC target value was set to 2e5 with a maximum ion injection time of 100 ms. The other settings were the same as for the Q Exactive Plus.
Tryptic peptides from the tonsil sample were also analysed on an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos Mass Spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Bremen, Germany) coupled on‐line to a nanoflow LC system (UltiMate™ 3000 RSLC Nano System, Thermo Fisher Scientific) using CID, and EThcD/ETD fragmentation. Full MS scans were performed at a resolution of 60,000, a maximum injection time of 50 ms and an AGC target value is 5e5, followed by MS2 events with a duty cycle of 2 s for the most intense precursors and a dynamic exclusion set to 60 s. CID scans were acquired with 35% normalized collision energy and Orbitrap readout (1e5 AGC target, 0.25 activation Q, 20 ms maximum injection time, inject ions for all available parallelizable time enabled, 1.3 m/z isolation width). EThcD/ETD scans used charge‐dependent parameters: 2+ precursor ions were fragmented by EThcD with 28% normalized collision energy and 3+ to 7+ precursor ions were fragmented by ETD. The MS2 scans were read out in the Orbitrap (1e5 AGC target, 0.25 activation Q and 100 ms maximum injection time).
MS data processing and database searching
For peptide and protein identification and label‐free quantification, the MaxQuant suite of tools version 1.5.3.30 was used. The spectra were searched against the Ensembl human proteome database (release‐83, GRCh38) with carbamidomethyl (C) specified as a fixed modification. Oxidation (M) and acetylation (protein N‐Term) were considered as variable modifications. Trypsin/P was specified as the proteolytic enzyme with 2 maximum missed cleavages. The match between runs function was enabled, with match time window set to 0.7 min and an alignment time window of 20 min. The FDR was set to 1% at both PSM and protein level. LysC/P, ArgC and LysN were specified with two maximum missed cleavages. Searches for GluC and AspN peptides allowed three missed cleavages. Chymotrypsin (C terminal of F, Y, L, W or M) was allowed with at most 4 missed cleavages. Label‐free quantification was performed using the iBAQ approach (Schwanhäusser et al, 2011). For non‐tryptic peptides and single tissue analysis, matching data between fractions were disabled.
Quantitative analysis of transcriptomes and proteomes
The quantitative analyses of proteomic and transcriptomic data were performed at the gene level. Since some genes have alternative Ensembl gene IDs with identical sequences, redundant protein sequences derived from these genes exist in protein sequence databases. These alternative gene IDs were not part of the reference sequences for the analysis of RNA‐Seq data. To improve comparability between RNA and protein measurements, such identifiers were removed from the MaxQuant output files an updated protein ID and gene ID column was added to Table EV1. To evaluate gene expression level, the total abundance of each gene in all individual sample was used. The data were log‐transformed (base 10) and normalized using median centring across tissues.
The genes were classified into “Tissue enriched”, “Group enriched”, “Tissue enhanced”, “Expressed in all” and “Mixed” as described by Uhlén et al (2015, 2016). Gene ontology analysis of genes only identified in transcriptomes and proteomes, and the elevated proteins expressed in each tissue were performed using the R package “clusterProfiler” and P‐values were adjusted according to the method by Benjamini–Hochberg (BH; Yu et al, 2012). The resulting (redundant) gene ontology terms (biology process) of elevated genes were removed using the “simplify” function in clusterProfiler based on GOSemSim (Yu et al, 2010). The list of 1,158 mitochondrial genes was obtained from MitoCarta 2.0 (Calvo et al, 2016). Essential genes (n = 583) were assembled from three human essential gene studies using CRISPR‐Cas9 and retroviral gene‐trap genetic screens (Blomen et al, 2015; Hart et al, 2015; Wang et al, 2015). Diseases‐related genes (n = 3,896) and kinase genes (n = 504) were obtained from UniProt. Cancer genes (n = 719) were downloaded from Cosmic (Futreal et al, 2004). Drug target genes (n = 784) were obtained from DrugBank (Wishart et al, 2018) and restricted to proteins directly related to the mechanism of action for at least one of the associated drugs. GPCR genes (n = 1,410) were obtained from HGNC, and phosphatase genes (n = 238) were from DEPOD (Duan et al, 2015). Transcription factor genes (IF, n = 1,639) were obtained from the HumanTFs collection (Lambert et al, 2018).
The Spearman correlation coefficient was used for correlating transcriptome and proteome levels in single tissues. The slopes were estimated by ranged major‐axis (RMA) regression, which allows errors in both variables and is symmetric, using the R package “lmodel2” (Csárdi et al, 2015). The protein–mRNA Spearman correlation coefficients of 9,870 genes which were at least expressed in 10 (20, 29) tissues at both mRNA and protein levels were calculated. The co‐inertia analysis (CIA) was performed using the “cia” function in the “made4” R package (Culhane et al, 2005). A total of 9,870 genes which were expressed in at least 10 tissues at both mRNA and protein levels were considered, and the remaining missing values were replaced with a positive value 1 × 104 times smaller than the lowest expression value in each dataset.
Protein copy numbers were calculated from intensity values according to the “proteomic ruler” approach (Wiśniewski et al, 2014). Transcript copy numbers were calculated from FPKM values based on the estimated total cellular RNA amount using the total intensity of ribosomal proteins (Wiśniewski et al, 2014) and the assumption that the cellular mRNA mass represents about 2% of the total cellular RNA mass (Melnikov et al, 2012).
Construction of sample‐specific protein sequence databases from RNA‐Seq data
RNA sequencing data were aligned to the human reference genome (GRCh38, v83) using Tophat2.0.8b. FPKM values were calculated using Cufflinks v2.1.1 as a proxy for transcript expression level. Rvboost was used for variant calling. All transcripts with FPKM > 1 were translated into protein sequences and included in the search database. Each tissue was searched against its matched RNA‐Seq database using MaxQuant as described above. The match between runs function was disabled. The MaxQuant output data were used for the isoform analysis.
Exome sequencing and variant calling
The exome of tonsil tissue was enriched using the Agilent SureSelectXT Kit (v5) and sequenced on an Illumina HiSeq 4000 sequencer. The raw data were aligned to the human reference genome (hg38) using bwa (v0.7.12), and duplicate reads were marked using Picard Tools (v2.4.1). Genomic variants were called and filtered using the GATK (v.3.6) HaplotypeCaller and VariantFiltration modules, respectively, according to the best practice guide (https://software.broadinstitute.org/gatk/best-practices/). Furthermore, variants at sites with a read depth < 10× were removed. We also removed any I/L variation as these cannot be distinguished by mass spectrometry. The resulting variants were annotated using the Ensembl Variant Effect Predictor (v85). The RNA sequencing data were aligned to the human reference genome (hg38) using STAR aligner (v2.5.2), and duplicate reads were marked using Picard Tools (v2.4.1). Variants were called using the GATK (v.3.6) HaplotypeCaller module, according to the aforementioned best practice guide.
A variant fasta formatted database was created by the “customProDB” package from the exomic variants (Wang & Zhang, 2013). Mascot searching of the ultra‐deep mass spectrometry data was performed against this database together with protein databases from UniProt and Ensembl using the following parameters: peptide mass tolerance set at 10 ppm, MS/MS tolerance set at 0.05 Da, carbamidomethylation of cysteine defined as fixed modification, oxidation of methionine and acetylation defined as variable modification. Trypsin‐, LysC‐, ArgC‐ and LysN‐digested peptides allowed up to two missed cleavages. AspN‐ and GluC (V8‐DE in Mascot search engine)‐digested peptides with up to three cleavages were considered. Chymotrypsin‐digested peptides were allowed to have a maximum of four missed cleavages. Resulting PSMs were analysed using Percolator (v3.01), and an overall FDR cut‐off of 1% was applied.
A custom python script was used to identify PSMs covering variant sites and showing either the variant or the canonical genotype. All initial candidate variant peptides had met the following criteria: (i) Mascot ion scores of at least 25; (ii) a Mascot delta score of at least 10; (iii) the peptide must only map to the variant database; (iv) the peptide must map to a single genomic position only; (v) for missense variants, the peptide must either show the variant amino acid or it must be cleaved according to a novel protease cleavage site arising from the variant; and (vi) for nonsense variants, the peptide must end at the novel C‐terminus. For canonical genotypes, the same criteria were applied except: (i) at least one protein the peptide maps to must not be from the variant database; (ii) for missense variants, the peptide must show the wild‐type amino acid; and (iii) for nonsense variants, the end of the peptide must be after the novel C‐terminus (after nonsense variant sites). The resulting candidate peptides were mapped against UniProt using BLAST to exclude other obvious explanations. To further consolidate the variants peptides and to reduce false positives, peptide identification by MaxQuant was performed in parallel. The customized exomic variant database was searched using the same parameters used for Ensembl database searches described above. The list of candidate variant peptides for the spectra angle analysis required the identification by both Mascot and MaxQuant.
Identification of peptides translated from non‐coding regions
A database of products from possible alternative translation initiation sites (aTIS) was constructed by searching the 5′ UTR of GENCODE transcripts (v25) for putative alternative start codons and in silico translating these “novel coding sequences”. This resulted in 474,991 aTIS “proteins” > 6 amino acids. The lncRNA protein databases were generated by three‐frame‐translating the GENCODE (v25) lncRNA database, resulting in 29,524 sequences. The standard 29 tissue proteomics datasets were supplemented with two tissues for which only proteome data were available (bone marrow, pituitary gland); in total, 50 samples (including replicates of some organs) were searched against concatenated sequence collections comprising the aTIS and lncRNA databases, GENCODE (v25), UniProt (downloaded on 03 February 2017) and sample‐specific RNA‐Seq‐based databases using Mascot to identify peptides from known proteins. The search parameters were the same as described for the exome variant peptide identification. The resulting PSMs were processed using Percolator, and an overall FDR cut‐off of 1% was applied. A custom python script was used to identify PSMs from putative‐translated lncRNAs or aTIS the database. Candidate peptides had to meet the following criteria: (i) the PSM must map to a single database only, i.e. aTIS or lncRNA but no any other; (ii) the Mascot score must be at least 25; (iii) the Mascot delta score must be at least 10; and (iv) the original underlying transcript must be expressed in at least one of the tissues (RNA‐Seq FPKM > 1). The resulting PSMs were then mapped against UniProt using BLAST to exclude other explanations for the novel peptide (e.g. peptides arising from a novel tryptic cleavage site due to a genomic variant). To consolidate the list of candidate aTIS and lncRNA peptides and to reduce false positives, the raw MS data were also searched by MaxQuant (using the same parameters as described for searches using Ensembl). Only those peptides were allowed to pass to the stage of spectral contrast angle analysis if they were identified by both Mascot and MaxQuant.
Validation of variant and non‐coding peptides by synthetic reference peptides
All peptides which passed the filter criteria for Mascot described above were synthesized at JPT Berlin using Fmoc‐based solid‐phase synthesis. The details of peptide synthesis, sample preparation and MS measurement were as described (Zolg et al, 2017). Normalized spectral contrast angle (SA) analysis was performed to compare endogenous and synthetic peptides using in‐house Python scripts (Toprak et al, 2014). Candidates passed if (i) they showed SA values of ≥ 0.7 (Pearson of ~0.9), (ii) the endogenous peptide had a Mascot score of 50 or higher or (iii) manual spectrum inspection substantiated the candidate peptide sequence assignment. In parallel, the tandem MS spectra of all candidate peptides were also inspected manually. For the identification of “missing proteins”, we required an Andromeda score of ≥ 100. The other criteria were the same as above.