ABSTRACT:
Immune cell infiltrates have proven highly relevant for colorectal carcinoma (CRC) prognosis, making CRC a promising candidate for immunotherapy. Since tumors interact with the immune system via HLA-presented peptide ligands, exact knowledge of the peptidome constitution is fundamental for understanding this relationship. Here we comprehensively describe the naturally presented HLA-ligandome of CRC and corresponding non-malignant colon (NMC) tissue. Mass spectrometry identified 35,367 and 28,132 HLA-class I ligands on CRC and NMC, attributable to 7,684 and 6,312 distinct source proteins, respectively. Cancer-exclusive peptides were assessed on source protein level using Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes (KEGG) and protein analysis through evolutionary relationships (PANTHER), revealing pathognomonic CRC-associated pathways including Wnt, TGF-β, PI3K, p53, and RTK-RAS. Relative quantitation of peptide presentation on paired CRC and NMC tissue further identified source proteins from cancer- and infection-associated pathways to be over-represented merely within the CRC ligandome. From the pool of tumor-exclusive peptides, a selected HLA-ligand subset was assessed for immunogenicity, with the majority exhibiting an existing T cell repertoire. Overall, these data show that the HLA-ligandome reflects cancer-associated pathways implicated in CRC oncogenesis, suggesting that alterations in tumor cell metabolism could result in cancer-specific, albeit not mutation-derived tumor-antigens. Hence, a defined pool of unique tumor peptides, attributable to complex cellular alterations that are exclusive to malignant cells might comprise promising candidates for immunotherapeutic applications.
METHODS:
Materials and Methods
Ethics approval and informed consent
This study was conducted in accordance with the Declaration of Helsinki and approved by the local institutional review board of the University Hospital Tübingen. All participants provided written informed consent.
Patient materials
Primary CRC (HLA-class I: n=30; HLA-class II: n=19) and corresponding non-malignant colon (NMC, HLA-class I: n=35; HLA-class II: n=20) tissue samples were obtained from surgical specimens (Suppl. Table 1). CRC diagnosis was confirmed as adenocarcinomas in all cases.
Peripheral blood was obtained from additional CRC patients (n=50) and blood donors (n=15 each for all eight most frequent Caucasian HLA-allotypes) . For in vitro priming buffy coats from anonymous blood donors (Department of Transfusion Medicine, Tübingen) were employed. Peripheral blood mononuclear cells (PBMC) were isolated from blood or buffy coats by density gradient centrifugation (LSM 1077, PAA, Pasching, Austria).
CRC patients (tissue cohort)
The study cohort (Suppl. Table 2) comprised 15 women and 22 men (median age 69 years; 27-85 years at surgery). Tumors were localized in the caecum (n=1), colon (n=21), sigma (n=13), or rectum (n=2). Curatively intended resection was performed in all patients.
Patients were followed for a median of 34.8 months (0.3-109.2 months), median overall survival was not reached.
CRC patients (PBMC cohort)
PBMC samples from 50 further CRC patients (Suppl. Table 2) were obtained, comprising 17 women and 33 men (median age 62 years; 24-82 years).
Median follow-up was 36.0 months (2-167 months). Median overall survival after initial diagnosis was not reached. During follow-up, 16 and 34 patients were without detectable or with active disease, respectively. 46 patients remained alive.
HLA-typing
High-resolution HLA-typing (using clinically validated LUMINEX and sequence-based typing) was performed for HLA-A, HLA-B, HLA-C, HLA-DRB1, and HLA-DQB1 (tissue cohort, Suppl. Table 1). Molecular HLA-typing (HLA-A, HLA-B, HLA-C) was performed for control patients and blood donors.
Isolation of HLA-ligands from primary CRC and NMC tissues
HLA-class I and II molecules were isolated by immunoaffinity purification using the panHLA-class I monoclonal antibody W6/32, the HLA-DR monoclonal antibody L243 and the panHLA-class II monoclonal antibody Tü39 (all produced in-house). Separate purification of HLA-class I and II ligands was performed eluting peptides with 0.2% trifluoroacetic acid.
Analysis of HLA-ligands by LC-MS/MS
HLA-ligand extracts separated for HLA-class I and II were analyzed in up to five technical replicates each, as previously described. In brief, peptide samples were separated by nanoflow uHPLC (UltiMate 3000 RSLCnano System, ThermoFisher, Waltham, MA) using a 50 μm × 25 cm column (PepMap RSLC, Thermo Fisher) and a gradient ranging from 2.4 to 32.0% acetonitrile over the course of 90 minutes. Eluting peptides were analyzed in an online coupled LTQ Orbitrap XL mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher) using a top 5 collision-induced dissociation fragmentation method.
Database search and spectral annotation
The Mascot search engine (Mascot 2.2.04, Matrix Science, Boston, MA) was used to search the human proteome in the Swiss-Prot database (20,279 reviewed protein sequences, September 2013) without enzymatic restriction. Oxidized methionine was allowed as a dynamic modification. The false discovery rate was estimated using the Percolator algorithm and set to 5%. Peptide lengths were limited to 8-12 amino acids for HLA-class I and 12-25 amino acids for HLA-class II. Protein inference was disabled, allowing for multiple protein annotations of peptides. HLA-class I annotation was performed using an in-house version of SYFPEITHI, and NetMHC (vers. 4.0). Annotation of HLA-class I ligands was based on the HLA-typing performed for each patient, ensuring high confidence annotations due to the restricted search space. HLA-class I peptide immunogenicity was predicted using the IEDB prediction tool (tools.iedb.org/immunogenicity).
For further reference, an in-house database of HLA-ligandome data from 132 non-malignant tissues was used (complete benign dataset), comprising NMC (n=35), PBMCs (n=33), kidney (n=31), liver (n=12), bone marrow (n=10), or other tissues (n=11).
Data availability
MS raw data for CRC/ NMC samples have been deposited to the ProteomeXchange Consortium (http://proteomecentral.proteomexchange.org) via the PRIDE partner repository with the dataset identifier PXD009602.
Annotation of source proteins to metabolic pathways
Considering exclusively detected source proteins from CRC and NMC tissue only, Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes (KEGG) pathway analysis and Protein Analyses Through Evolutionary Relationships (PANTHER, version 10) were executed using PAVER software (Decodon, Greifswald, Germany) as described previously. Here, the tile color codes for exclusivity among CRC or NMC source proteins. The log2 detection quotient on CRC versus NMC tissue was coded as follows: orange depicts log2 ratios above zero (exclusively detected in CRC tissue), blue: log2 ratios below zero (exclusively detected in NMC). In these graphs, the size of single tiles is without relevance, whereas the polygon size attributable to distinct items correlates with the number of included source proteins.
Word clouds were created using an internet-based tool (www.worditout.com). Here, font size correlates with the relative abundance of CRC/NMC samples presenting HLA-ligands attributable to the respective source proteins.
Relative quantitation of HLA-presented peptides
For label-free quantitation (LFQ) of relative HLA-ligand abundances, the total injected peptide amounts of all paired CRC/NMC samples were normalized and LC-MS/MS analysis was performed in five technical replicates for each sample. For normalization, the relative sample amounts in the respective ligand extracts were estimated based on the summed intensities of all peptide identifications detected in dose-finding mass spectrometry runs. Injected sample amounts were diluted for subsequent LFQ runs accordingly. Relative quantification of HLA-ligands was performed using the area of precursor extracted ion chromatograms (XIC) using ProteomeDiscoverer 1.4 (Thermo Fisher).
For Volcano plots, the ratios of the mean area of individual peptides in five replicate LFQ runs per condition were calculated (fold change; x-axis) and two-tailed Student’s t-tests comparing peptide abundance in CRC and NMC tissue performed, applying Benjamini–Hochberg correction for multiple testing (y-axis), using an R script (v3.2) as described previously . Only peptides detectable at least in two LFQ runs on either CRC or NMC were included. For imputation of missing peptide identifications, the median area of the five lowest intensity identifications in the same run was utilized as an estimate for the limit of detection (LOD). Peptides were considered significantly over-represented on either CRC or NMC, if the fold change was above 2 log2 (4-fold over-represented) with p-values <0.01.
For all significantly over-represented peptides on CRC or NMC, pathway annotation was performed using an internet-based Search Tool for the Retrieval of INteracting Genes/proteins (STRING, www.string-db.org, version 10, String Consortium, Swiss Institute for Bioinformatics, Zürich, Switzerland).
Immunohistochemistry
Thirty representative CRC samples were stained for HLA-class I (clone HCA2, BIOZOL, Eching, Germany, diluted 1:200) and HLA-class II (Clone M0775, DAKO, Glostrup, Denmark, diluted 1:200). Staining was performed on formalin-fixed, paraffin-embedded tissue sections on a Lab Vision Autostainer (Thermo Scientific), following the manufacturer’s protocols.
Peptide and HLA-peptide monomer synthesis
Peptides were synthesized by automated peptide synthesizers (EPS 221, Abimed, Langenfeld, Germany; ABI 433A, Applied Biosystems, Darmstadt, Germany) using the 9-fluorenylmethyl-oxycarbonyl/tert-butyl (Fmoc/tBu) strategy. Biotinylated recombinant HLA-molecules and fluorescent HLA-peptide tetramers were produced as described previously .
Priming of peptide-specific T cells using aAPC
For the generation of artificial antigen-presenting cells (aAPC), streptavidin-coated polystyrene particles (Bangs Laboratories, Fishers, IN) were resuspended in PBE (PBS/BSA/ETDA, Gibco (ThermoFisher)), containing biotinylated HLA-peptide monomer and anti-human biotinylated CD28 antibody (produced in-house) and incubated at room temperature for 30 min under continuous shaking. After washing, aAPCs were stored at 4°C prior to use. T cells from healthy blood donors were enriched by CD8+ positivity using magnetic cell sorting (Miltenyi Biotec, Bergisch Gladbach, Germany). Stimulations were performed in 96-well plates with 1×106 T cells plus 2×105 aAPC complemented with human IL-12 (PromoKine, Heidelberg, Germany). IL-2 (R&D, Minneapolis, MN) was added on day 5, 12 and 19. aAPC stimulation was repeated on days 10 and 17, for a total of 3 cycles. Cells were evaluated on day 29 in multimer stainings.
Pre-sensitization of antigen-specific T cells
T cells were pre-sensitized with peptides (1 µg/ml) and IL-2 for 12 days. Cells were restimulated afterwards and evaluated in IFN-γ ELISpot.
IFN-γ ELISpot assay
Pre-sensitized or primed cells were stimulated (24h) with peptides (1 µg/ml) in antibody precoated nitrocellulose plates. Positive and negative controls (Suppl. Table 3), reagents and instruments were used as reported previously. Duplicate wells were considered positive if at least 10 spots per 250,000 PBMCs were detectable in either well, and the mean number of spots exceeded the spots in the negative control more than three-fold. Unstimulated PBMCs and phytohemagglutinin (PHA, Sigma, München, Germany) were used as additional controls.
Multimer staining
Multimers were produced by addition of streptavidin-R-phycoerythrin conjugate (SAPE, ThermoFisher) successively to a monomer, with 30 min of incubation while rotating overhead between each SAPE addition. Primed CD8+ T cells were stained with Life/Dead Fixable Aqua (ThermoFisher), CD8-PE-Cy7 (Beckmann Coulter, Brea, CA) and multimers and measured using a FACSCanto (BD Biosciences, Franklin Lakes, NJ). Unstimulated and unstained PBMCs and ionomycin/phorbol 12-myristate-13-acetate (PMA) were used as controls.
Staining was only considered specific when at least a population of 0.5% of multimer-specific T cells was detectable.
Software and statistical analysis
R and Python scripts were used for the HLA-peptide plateau regression analysis.
Further statistical tests including two-sided and paired Student’s t-tests, as well as Kaplan-Meier regression analysis were performed using IBM SPSS Version 22 (2011, IBM Corporation, Armonk, NY). p-values <0.05 were considered significant.