ABSTRACT:
The group of polyhydroxysteroid phytohormones referred to as the brassinosteroids (BRs) is known to act on plant development and the stress response. BR signal transduction relies largely on protein phosphorylation. By employing a label-free, MS (Mass Spectrometry)-based phosphoproteomic approach, we report here the largest profiling of 4,034 phosphosites on 1,900 phosphoproteins from rice young seedlings and their dynamic response to BR. 1,821 proteins, including kinases, transcription factors and core components of BR and other hormone signaling pathways, were found to be differentially phosphorylated during the BR treatment. A Western blot analysis verified the differential phosphorylation of five of these proteins, implying that the MS-based phosphoproteomic data were robust. It is proposed that the dephosphorylation of gibberellin (GA) signaling components could represent an important mechanism for the BR-regulated antagonism to GA, and that BR influences the plant architecture of rice by regulating cellulose synthesis via phosphorylation.
METHODS:
Materials and Methods
Plant Materials and BR Treatment
The Nipponbare (Oryza sativa L. ssp japonica) plants used in this study were grown by hydroponics method in growth chambers (90% relative humidity, 30/28°C, 14 h light/10 h dark cycle). Two-week old young seedlings with hydroponics were soaked into water containing 10 μM epibrassinolide (Cat No. E1641, Sigma, St. Louis, MN, USA) for 24 hours, during which samples were collected at different time points (0 h, 3 h, 6 h, 12 h, and 24 h) and immediately stored in liquid nitrogen until use. Three biological replicates were performed for each treatment and the control.
Quantitative RT-PCR
Total RNA of the samples after BR treatment was isolated using Trizol (Invitrogen, Carlsbad, CA, USA) according to the manufacturer’s manual. Four micrograms of total RNA was performed for reverse transcription using first strand cDNA synthesis Kit (Toyobo, Shanghai, China). The primer pairs were set to detect the expression level of ILI1 (LOC_Os04g54900) (forward: 5′ ATGTCGAGCAGCCGGAGGTC 3′, reverse: 5′ CGTCTCGCTGAGGTTGTCC 3′), BUI1 (LOC_Os06g12210) (forward: 5′ CGACGACGAAGCTGCTGA 3′, reverse: 5′ CGCCTGGGCTGTTGTGAT 3′), IBH1 (LOC_Os04g56500) (forward 5′ CCGCCGAACCCTAACCCTAG, reverse 5′ CAGGAAGTGGAAGGCCAGCAT) and ubiquitin gene was used as an internal control (primer forward 5′ CACCCTGGCTGACTACAACA 3′, reverse 5′ TTCTTCTTGCGGCAGTTGAC 3′). Real-time quantitative RT-PCR was performed in a total reaction volume of 20 ml (10 μL THUNDERBIRD SYBR® qPCR Mix (Toyobo, Shanghai, China), 1 μL cDNA, 1 μL primers, and 8 μL water) on the Bio-Rad CFX96 real-time PCR detection system (Bio-Rad, Hercules, CA, USA). The relative expression level was calculated by the 2-ΔΔCT method. The experiment was performed in three biological replicates.
Phosphopeptide Preparation
The total protein extraction and digestion were performed by exactly following the methods described by. For phosphopeptides enrichment, 1 mg digested peptides were dissolved with binding buffer (80% ACN, 5% TFA, 1 M lactic acid), then incubated with 4 mg TiO2 beads (GL sciences, Torrance, CA, USA) for three times, each time for 30 minutes at room temperature. The totally 12 mg beads were then washed with 500 μL binding buffer for twice and 500 μL washing buffer (80% CAN, 0.5% TFA) for twice. All TiO2 beads were transferred into a 200 μL homemade StageTip containing two layers of C18 solid phase extraction disk (3M, St. Paul, MN, USA). The StageTip was centrifuged at 300 g for 10 min to discard the flow through. The enriched phosphopeptides were incubated with 150 μL elution buffer (40% ACN, 15% NH3H2O) for four times. The combined 600 μL eluates were subsequently dried to ∼5 μL in a SpeedVac and reconstituted with 5% MeOH in 1% TFA solution for LC-MS/MS analysis.
LC-MS/MS and Data Analysis
This was done in Beijing Proteome Research Center. LC-MS/MS analyses were performed on an Easy-nLC 1000 liquid chromatography system (Thermo, Waltham, MA, USA) coupled to a Q-Exactive Plus via a nano-electrospray ion source (Thermo, Waltham, MA, USA). The peptide mixture was eluted from a 360-μm ID × 2 cm, C18 trap column and separated on a homemade 100 μm ID × 10 cm column with a linear 5–35% acetonitrile gradient at 500 nl/min. Survey scan were acquired after accumulation of 3e6 ions in Orbitrap for m/z 300–1400 using a resolution of 70,000 at m/z 400. The top 20 most intense precursor ions were selected for fragmentation in the HCD cell at normalized collision energy of 27%, and then fragment ions were transferred into the Orbitrap analyzer operating at a resolution of 17,500 at m/z 400. For the phosphopeptide identification and phosphosite quantification, raw spectral data were processed in Proteome Discoverer 1.4.1.14 suites with Mascot search engine against the rice genome annotation project database1. The mass tolerance was set at 20 ppm for precursor, and 50 mmu for the tolerance of product ions. Oxidation (M), Acetyl (Protein-N term), and Phospho(S/T/Y) were set as variable modifications, and Carbamidomethyl (C) as static modification in the Mascot searches for phosphopeptides. Two missed cleavage on trypsin was allowed. The results were filtered for peptide with False discovery rates <1% by the Percolator tool of the Protein Discoverer package. PhosphoRS software within the Protein Discoverer software suite were used for an automatically re-analyzing of all the phosphopeptide hits, and those phosphorylation sites with a PhosphoRS probability higher than 90% were accepted as localized. Only those peptides which were phosphorylated in at least two of the three biological replicates were considered as truly phosphorylated. The phosphorylation is quantified based on the peak area under the ion intensity by using precursor ions area detector in PD1.4.1.14. Within-group means were calculated to determine fold changes. The differentially phosphorylated (DP) protein was defined to have over twofold changes in the average intensity with credible student’s t-test (P < 0.05).
Western Blot Analysis
CIAP treatment was performed by adding 1 μL of calf intestinal alkaline phosphatase (Takara, Dalian, China) into 20 μg protein of each sample for 30 min at 37°C. Then, Western blot was conducted following. The prepared protein samples were resolved in 10% SDS-polyacrylamide gel, and transferred onto a 0.45 μm polyvinylidene fluoride fluoropolymer (PVDF) membrane (Millipore, Darmstadt, Germany) by using an electrophoretic blotting system (Bio-Rad, Hercules, CA, USA). The immune-blot were detected with corresponding primary antibodies (1:1000 dilution), secondary antibody IgG conjugated with HRP (1:20,000 dilution), and visualized by using the enhanced chemiluminescence (Pierce, Waltham, MA, USA). β-tubulin protein was used as the internal control. The band intensities were quantified using the ImageJ software according to the instructions2. All the sample intensities were first normalized to the control β-tubulin, and then calculated based on the ratio to set the relative level of 0 h into 1. The primary antibody against OsBZR1, D1, GID2, SAPK9, and SMG1 were commercially synthesized by immunizing rabbits and affinity purified by GenScript Company (Nanjing, China). The antigenic determinant peptide sequences are D1/RGA1: CSRSHSLSEAETTK; SMG1: MRPGGPPSLRAGLQC; SAPK9: MERAAAGPLGMEMPC; GID2: MSQPAELSREENVYC, and BZR1: CRPPKIRKPDWDVDP. Anti-β-tubulin (Cat No. M20005) were purchased from Abmart Company (Shanghai, China).