ABSTRACT:
Calcium Dependent Protein Kinases are key effectors of calcium signaling in malaria parasite. PfCDPK1 is critical for asexual development of Plasmodium falciparum, but its precise function and substrates remain largely unknown. Using a conditional knockdown strategy, we here establish that this kinase is critical for the invasion of host erythrocytes. Furthermore, using a multidisciplinary approach involving comparative phosphoproteomics we gain insights into the underlying molecular mechanisms. We identify substrates of PfCDPK1, which includes proteins of Inner Membrane Complex and glideosome-actomyosin motor assembly. Interestingly, PfCDPK1 phosphorylates PfPKA regulatory subunit (PfPKA-R) and regulates PfPKA activity in the parasite, which may be relevant for the process of invasion. This study delineates the signaling network of PfCDPK1 and sheds light on mechanisms via which it regulates invasion.
Calcium dependent protein kinase 1 (CDPK1) plays an important role in asexual development of Plasmodium falciparum. Using phosphoproteomics and conditional knockdown of CDPK1, the authors here identify CDPK1 substrates and a cross-talk between CDPK1 and PKA, and show the role of CDPK1 in parasite invasion.
METHODS:
Methods
Reagents and antibodies
All the molecular biology reagents were purchased from Sigma-Aldrich. Oligonucleotides were procured form Sigma-Aldrich, restriction enzymes were obtained from New England Biolabs, USA. Commercially available antibodies were obtained from Santa Cruz Biotechnology (mouse anti- β-Actin (1:500, C4, sc-47778 HRP), rabbit anti-HA (1:500, Y-11, sc-805) and rabbit anti-GAPDH (1:500, FL 335, sc-25778)). Protein A/G plus agarose beads (sc-2003) were obtained from Santa Cruz Biotechnology. Anti-EBA-175 antibody was obtained from MR4 (1 : 1000, MRA-2). Other antibodies were kindly gifted by Dr. Chetan Chitnis, Institute Pasteur, Paris (1 : 1000, rabbit anti-AMA1), Prof. Alan Cowman, Walter & Eliza Hall Institute (1 : 2500, rabbit anti-RH5), Dr. Anthony A. Holder (1 : 2000 rabbit anti-GAP45). Shld-1 was purchased from Cheminpharma, LLC, USA. PKA Inhibitor PKI was obtained from Enzo life sciences (PKI14-22 amide, myristoylated), 8Br-cAMP, BAPTA-AM, Neuraminidase, trypsin, chymotrypsin were obtained from Sigma-Aldrich.
Generation of transgenic parasites
For C-terminal tagging of PfCDPK1 locus with 3HA-DD, ~1.1 kb of the 3′end of the PfCDPK1 ORF (PlasmoDB ID PF3D7_0217500) without the stop codon was PCR amplified from P. falciparum genomic DNA (strain D10) with primers oJDD400 (5′-TAGGCGGCCGCTTAGTAACCGAATTTTATGAAGGTGGGG) and oJDD62 (5′- TAGCTCGAGTGAAGATTTATTATCACAAATTTTGTGCATCATG). The amplicon was ligated into 3HA-DD plasmid between the restriction sites NotI and XhoI, upstream and in-frame with the coding sequence of the 3HA and DD-tags. The PfCDPK1-3HA-DD plasmid, which has the human DHFR selection cassette, was prepared by using Qiagen Maxi prep kit. Approximately 100 µg plasmid DNA was transfected into D10 strain (WEHI) and selected using 5 nM WR99210 (gifted by Jacobus Pharmaceuticals). Integration of the plasmid was promoted by several cycles of drug treatment (~1 week) followed by culturing parasites without drug (~3 weeks). When parasites became resistant to WR99210 after a prolonged period off-drug, parasites were cloned by limiting dilution in a 96 well plate (nominal density, 3 parasites per 10 wells). The integration of 3HA-DD at the PfCDPK1 locus was confirmed by genotyping PCR, for which PCR primers were designed to amplify the endogenous locus, the 3′integration and the episome (see Supplementary Fig. 1). Furthermore, the 3′-integration amplicon was cloned and sequenced to confirm the integration at the desired locus.
The PfPKA-R overexpressing cell line was designed using the pARL-GFP vector. The full length gene (PF3D7_1223100) was PCR amplified using Phusion DNA polymerase and PKA-RGFP_F and PKA-RGFP_R, KpnI/ AvrII digested and cloned into the digested pARL-GFP plasmid. The chimeric gene containing the open reading frame of PfPKA-R and GFP is driven by the late stage specific AMA1 promoter mimicking the expression profile of the endogenous PfPKA-R gene. The construct was sequenced and analyzed for accuracy.
Parasite culture and transfections
 P. falciparum asexual blood stages were cultured in O+ erythrocytes according to standard procedures. In addition, 3D7 (MR4) were transfected with 100 µg of purified plasmid DNA, as described previously. Positive selection of transfected parasites was achieved by addition of 10 nM WR99210, an antifolate that selects for the presence of the human DHFR gene. P. falciparum lines were cultured in complete RPMI 1640 medium with 0.5% albumax and gassed with 7% CO2, 1% O2 and 88% N2 at 37 °C. Synchronization of parasites was achieved by treatment with 5% sorbitol. P. falciparum CDPK1-3HA-DD parasites were cultured in the presence of 2.5 nM WR99210 and 0.25 μM Shld-1. PfPKA-R-GFP and PfPKA-C-HA overexpressing parasite cultures were supplemented with 10 nM WR99210. PfCDPK1-3HA-DD parasites were generated in D10 background by transfecting plasmids for single cross-over homologous recombination. PfPKA-R-GFP overexpressing parasites were generated by transfection of 3D7 strain.
Treatment of parasites with pharmacological reagents
Typically, schizont-infected RBCs were treated with IBMX (250 μM), BAPTA-AM (40 μM), 8Br-cAMP (100 μM), PKI (20 μM) unless indicated otherwise.
Growth rate and invasion assays
For comparison of growth rate of the PfCDPK1-3HA-DD parasites in the presence or absence of Shld-1, parasites were synchronized using 5% sorbitol. The effect of Shld-1 removal on PfCDPK1-3HA-DD parasites was studied by splitting synchronized parasite cultures into two halves at ring stage. Shld-1 was withdrawn from one half and plating was done at equal parasitemia at the schizont stage. Parasite growth was quantified for 2–3 life cycles.
The parasite invasion assays were performed, as described earlier with minor modifications. Invasion assays were performed by using schizonts from which Shld-1 was withdrawn for one cycle, as described above. Schizonts (~38–40 h.p.i) at 0.5–1% parasitemia were incubated with fresh RBCs and formation of new rings was monitored by examining Giemsa stained smears after 3–9 h and/or by performing FACS of SYBR Green stained parasites, which were fixed 30 h post invasion. FACS assay was performed using a slightly modified previous published protocol. Briefly, ~300 µl parasite infected RBCs were washed thrice with PBS and were fixed with 4% paraformaldehyde for 30 min. After fixation, parasites were washed twice with PBS and stained with SYBR Green (1 : 5000 in PBS) for 1 h in dark. Cells were washed with PBS twice and resuspended in 800 µl of PBS and used for FACS using BD Accuri C6 Plus machine. Data were analyzed using FloJo software after excluding the autofluorescence from unstained cells by gating. To study the effect of Neuraminidase (Nm), ring infected RBCs were treated with 66 mU ml−1 Neuraminidase and 1 mg ml−1 Trypsin to prevent reinvasion, as described previously for 37 °C for 1 h. To study the effect of Chymotrypsin (CT), RBCs were treated with 1 mg ml−1 CT for 1 h at 37 °C, as described previously. For performing invasion assays with PfPKA-R-GFP parasites, parasites were treated with 100 µM 8Br-cAMP 3 h prior to performing invasion assays.
Parasite attachment assay
The attachment assays were performed as described earlier with slight modifications. Briefly, CDPK1-3HA-DD parasites were tightly synchronized, split into 2 × 15 ml (5% parasitemia, 5 % hematocrit) and from one half Shld-1 was withdrawn. The parasites were allowed to mature to schizonts (~ 40 h) and maintained in 50 U ml–1 of heparin for additional ~ 6 h. Subsequently, parasite-infected RBCs were plated in 6-well culture plates after washing with complete RPMI1640 along with fresh RBCs and treated with 1 μM cytochalasin D or DMSO (control). The plates were incubated in Ziploc bags, equilibrated with appropriate gas mixture and kept on a shaker at 80 rpm at 37 °C. Thin blood smears were prepared after 8–12 h, which were used for staining parasite nuclei with DAPI. The numbers of attached parasites were counted by microscopically analyzing the DAPI stained parasites.
Protein digestion and iTRAQ labeling
The work flow followed for these studies is described in Fig. 1c. The analysis was carried out on four independent biological replicates and one of the replicate was further processed and analyzed as technical duplicates. Therefore, the phosphorylation levels of proteins upon CDPK1 knockdown was studied in five independent analyses.
PfCDPK1-3HA-DD parasites were cultured in the presence or absence of Shld-1 and harvested at the late schizont stage, pellets were pooled and suspended in lysis buffer (8 M Urea, 1 mM Sodium fluoride, 1 mM sodium orthovanadate, 2.5 mM sodium pyrophosphate and 1 mM ß-glycerophosphate). Cells were lysed after multiple cycles of freeze thaw followed by sonication and centrifugation at 18,407 × g for 30 min. The supernatant was collected and protein was estimated using Bicinchoninic acid assay (Pierce, Waltham, MA, USA). An equal amount of protein (1.5 mg) from each case was reduced using DTT at a final concentration of 5 mM at 60 °C for 30 min and alkylated using 10 mM iodoacetamide for 10 min at room temperature kept in dark. Trypsin was added in a ratio of 1 unit of trypsin per 20 unit of sample and kept for overnight digestion at 37 °C. Buffer exchange was done using Sep-Pak C18 columns (Waters Corporation, Milford, MA, USA) and peptides were lyophilized. iTRAQ labeling of the peptides was carried out as per manufacturer’s instructions. Peptides from wild type parasites were labeled in technical replicates with 114 and 115 iTRAQ reporter ions and peptides from CDPK1 knockdown parasites were labeled with 116 and 117 reporter ions. Labeling of the peptides was checked and the four samples were pooled in equal amount and dried. One more biological replicate was processed in the same way, which was again analyzed as two technical replicates.
Basic RPLC and phosphopeptide enrichment
The lyophilized peptides were reconstituted in bRPLC solvent A (10 mM triethylammonium bicarbonate, pH 8.5) and fractionated on Xbridge C18 5 um 250 × 4.6 mm column (Waters Corporation, Milford, MA, USA) using Agilent 1100 binary pump (Agilent Technologies, Santa Clara, CA, USA). The sample was resolved through reverse-phase liquid chromatography method using a gradient of 5 to 60% solvent B (10 mM triethylammonium bicarbonate, pH 8.5 in 95% Acetonitrile) with 1 ml flow rate per minute for over 60 min. A total of 96 fractions were concatenated into 12 fractions and vacuum dried. One tenth of each fraction was taken out for total proteomic analysis and the rest was further processed for TiO2 based enrichment of phosphopeptides. Titansphere beads (GL Sciences, Japan) were mixed with peptides in 1:1 ratio and incubated on rotor for 1 h at room temperature. Peptides were then washed with 80% ACN in 3% TFA and eluted using 4% ammonia solution followed by neutralization with 3% TFA. Eluted peptides were then dried and desalted using C18 stage tips and then subjected to LC-MS/MS analysis.
LC-MS/MS analysis
Each fraction was reconstituted in 0.1% formic acid and analyzed on Orbitrap Fusion Tribrid mass spectrometer interfaced with Proxeon Easy-nLC 1000 system (Thermo Scientific, Bremen, Germany). The sample was first loaded onto a 2 cm long pre-column packed in-house with magic C18 AQ (MichromBioresources, Auburn, CA, USA). Peptides were resolved on an analytical column (75 µ × 15 cm, 3 µ particle and 100 Å pore size) using a linear gradient of 7 to 30% of solvent B (0.1% formic acid in 95% Acetonitrile) over 120 min. Both MS and MS/MS was acquired using Orbitrap mass analyzer and full scans were acquired with scan range of 350–1800 m/z and at a resolution of 120,000 at 200 m/z. The data were acquired in top speed mode with 3 s cycles, which would allow the instrument to continuously perform MS2 scans until the list of precursors diminish to zero or 3 s. Most intense precursor ions were selected and fragmented using higher-energy collisional dissociation (HCD) with 35% normalized collision energy. Fragment ions were detected in Orbitrap with mass resolution of 30,000 and AGC target value was set to 50,000 with maximum ion injection time of 200 ms. Singly charged ions were rejected and dynamic exclusion was set to 30 s. Internal calibration was carried out using lock mass option (m/z 445.1200025) from ambient air.
MS data analysis
The mass spectrometry derived data were searched using Mascot and Sequest search engines using Proteome Discoverer 1.4 (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Bremen, Germany). Phosphopeptides enriched fractions and total proteome data from each replicate were searched against a combined Human and P. falciparum NCBI RefSeq protein database (version 65) with carbamidomethylation of cysteine residues, peptide N-terminal and lysine side chain of iTRAQ as fixed modification. Oxidation of methionine and phosphorylation of serine, threonine and tyrosine was selected as dynamic modifications. Trypsin was set as the protease and maximum of one missed cleavage was allowed. Precursor mass tolerance was set to 20 ppm and fragment mass tolerance of 0.1 Da was allowed. All PSMs were identified at 1% FDR. Posterior error probability was calculated for individual PSM using percolator, providing statistical confidence for each spectral match. If a given spectrum was assigned to different peptides by Mascot and Sequest, they were discarded and not considered for further analysis. The probability of phosphorylation for each site was calculated by the phosphoRS node in Proteome Discoverer. Only the phosphopeptides with >75% site localization were considered for further analysis. Phosphorylation fold change for each peptide was normalized with the total proteome level change and a normalized phosphorylation change of >0.75 fold was considered as significantly regulated.
Gene ontology analysis
The gene ontologies for Plasmodium falciparum proteins were downloaded from PlasmoDB database. Hypophosphorylated proteins that lacked appropriate GO annotation were assigned with relevant GO terminologies based on manual curation of the available literature. We merged our manually curated information with the available ontologies and carried out GO enrichment analysis on the list of hypophosphorylated proteins using FunRich tool. The list of proteins identified in our analysis was selected as background and the hypophosphorylated proteins were provided as input. The fold- enrichment and P values associated with biological processes, molecular functions and cellular localizations are provided in Supplementary Data 2.
Motif analysis
The list of hypophosphorylated sites with a width of 15 amino acids was subjected to motif analysis using motif-X tool. A background of P. falciparum protein database was used for the analysis and occurrences threshold was set to default i.e. 20. A P value threshold of ≤ 1e-6 was used to identify enriched motifs.
Protein-protein interaction networks prediction
The list of differentially phosphorylated proteins upon CDPK1 knockdown was submitted to STRING database (version 10.0) for protein–protein interaction analysis. Interactions with high confidence and score of >0.7 were considered as significant and considered for the study.
Expression of recombinant proteins
For expression of PfPKA-C (PlasmoDB ID PF3D7_0934800), PfPKA-R (PlasmoDB ID PF3D7_1223100) and their mutants as GST fusion proteins, their ORFs were cloned in pGEX4T1 vector (GE Healthcare) using PCR primers PfPKA-R_F and PfPKA-R_R (PfPKA-R) and PfPKA-C_F and PfPKA-C_R (PfPKA-C). Primer sequences are provided in Supplementary Table 1. PfCDPK1 (PlasmoDB ID PF3D7_0217500) expression has been described previously. For expression of PfIMC1g (PlasmoDB ID PF3D7_0525800), its ORF was cloned in pET28a (Novagen) vector using PCR primers PfIMC1g_F and PfIMC1g_R respectively. These and other 6xHis-tagged or GST-fusion recombinant proteins described in the manuscript were expressed and purified by using standard procedures using Ni-NTA or GSH-sepharose affinity matrices, respectively. Expression and purification of 6xHis-PfGAP45 has been described previously. Protein concentration was determined by densitometry analysis of coomassie stained gels using NIH Image J software.
Generation of antisera
Antisera was raised against PfPKA-C and PfPKA-R using KLH-conjugated synthetic peptides designed from their C-terminus following standard procedures in rabbits (2–3 months old, New Zealand) and mice (Balb/c, 4–6 week old) (Supplementary Fig. 6). PfPKA-C: H-(KLH) cys-VPYKPKYKNIFDSSNFE-OH; PfPKA-R: H-(KLH) cys-CDILHRNVENYKKVLNE-OH. Antisera against PfIMC1g was raised in mice using full length 6xHis PfIMC1g recombinant protein, which was expressed using standard procedures.
Antibody against PfPKA-R phosphorylated at S149 was custom generated by Antagene. Inc. (USA). For this purpose, a synthetic peptide with sequence
Cys- HFIQKKRL(p)SVSAEAYGDWNK or a control without phosphoserine was used. Cysteine at the N-terminus was added for KLH-conjugation. The phosphorylated and non-phosphorylated peptides were used to immunize rabbits over a 12-week schedule. Antisera were collected after 10 days of fourth immunization and antibody titers were determined by performing ELISA against the phosphorylated and the non-phosphorylated peptides. The antisera were enriched following a two-step phospho-peptide antibody purification method.
Kinase assays
Protein kinase assays were performed using recombinant 6xHis-PfCDPK1 in a reaction buffer containing 50 mM Tris pH 7.4, 10 mM Magnesium Chloride, 1 mM Dithiothreitol, 100 µM CaCl2 and 100 μM γ32-P[ATP] 15μCi/reaction using recombinant substrates like PfGAP45, PfPKA-R, IMC1g. Reactions were carried out at 30 °C for 45 min and stopped by boiling them in SDS-PAGE loading buffer. The reaction mixture was electrophoresed on SDS-PAGE and phosphorylation of proteins was detected by phosphorimaging using a Fujifilm FLA-5000 scanner. For assaying activity of PfCDPK1 and PfPKA in the parasite, anti-PfCDPK1 or PfPKA-C antisera was used for immunoprecipitation and PfCDPK1-IP or PfPKA-IP was used for kinase assays as described above. For assaying PfPKA-C activity, a parasite line overexpresssing PfPKA-C-HA was used by immunoprecipitating using anti-HA antibody. The IP was subsequently used for kinase assays.
Metabolic labeling of parasites
PfCDPK1-3HA-DD parasites were synchronized twice at the ring stage. Parasites were split in two halves after washing with complete RPMI 1640 media and Shld-1 was withdrawn from one of them. ~40 h post-invasion, parasites were washed twice with phosphate deficient RPMI 1640 medium (Hyclone) supplemented with 0.5% albumax (Gibco, Life Tech). These parasites were incubated with 32P orthophosphoric acid (1–2 mCi ml–1) till segmenters were formed. Parasite lysate was prepared in complete lysis buffer described below and immunoprecipitation was done using specific antibodies. The immunoprecipitate was electrophoresed on SDS-PAGE and labeled proteins were detected by phosphorimaging using a Fujifilm FLA-5000 scanner.
Immunoblotting and immunoprecipitation
After various treatments with various pharmacological inhibitors, parasites were harvested by 0.05% saponin lysis at 4 °C for 30 min and were washed thrice with ice cold PBS and resuspended in complete lysis buffer containing 10 mM Tris pH 7.4, 100 mM sodium chloride, 5 mM ethylenediaminetetraacetic acid, 1% Triton X-100, 100 μM sodium orthovanadate, 20 μM β glycerophosphate, 1× protease inhibitor cocktail and 10% glycerol. Cell-free protein extracts were prepared from these parasites by syringe lysis and clearing by centrifugation at 15,871 × g at 4 °C for 30 min. After separation on 10% SDS-PAGE, lysate proteins were transferred to a nitrocellulose membrane. Immunoblotting was performed using specific antisera and blots were developed using SuperSignal West Pico, or Dura Chemiluminescence Substrate (Thermo Scientific) following manufacturer’s instructions.
For immunoprecipitation, 60–100 µg of lysate protein was typically used and incubated with relevant antibodies at 4 °C for 12 h followed by incubation with protein A+G plus agarose beads for 5 h. The beads were washed with cold complete lysis buffer and resuspended in 50 µl 1× kinase assay buffer for kinase assay and in 50 µl 1× SDS-PAGE loading buffer for western blotting. Immunoblots were cropped for presentation in main figures and full-sized images of some of the blots are presented in Supplementary Fig. 7.
Detection of secreted proteins
PfCDPK1-3HA-DD parasites were synchronized and Shld-1 was withdrawn at the ring stage for 1–2 cycles, as described above. Fresh media was added to schizont/segmenters, which were allowed to burst to release merozoites. Subsequently, the culture was centrifuged at 500×g for 5 min to separate the free merozoites from the infected and uninfected RBCs. The culture supernatant containing merozoites was further centrifuged at 3300×g for 5 min to separate merozoite and secreted proteins released in the supernatant.
Ethics statement
The animal experiments, which involved antisera generation, were performed at National Institute of Immunology, New Delhi with the approval of the Institute Animal Ethics Committee (IAEC) and prescribed guidelines were followed.
Densitometry and statistical analysis
Image J (NIH) software was used to perform densitometry of western blots. The band intensity of the loading control was used for normalization. Statistical analysis was performed using Prism (Graph Pad software Inc USA). Data are represented as mean±Standard Error of Mean (s.e.m.) from three independent experiments, unless indicated otherwise and p<0.05 was taken as statistically significant.
Data availability
The mass spectrometry-based proteomics data have been deposited to the ProteomeXchange Consortium (http://proteomecentral.proteomexchange.org) and can be accessed via the PRIDE partner repository with the data set identifier PXD005207.
All other relevant data are available from the authors upon request.