ABSTRACT:
SUMMARY
Immunotherapy has revolutionized cancer treatment, yet most patients do not respond. Here, we investigated mechanisms of response by profiling the proteome of clinical samples from advanced stage melanoma patients undergoing either tumor infiltrating lymphocyte (TIL)-based or anti- programmed death 1 (PD1) immunotherapy. Using high-resolution mass spectrometry, we quantified over 10,300 proteins in total and ~4,500 proteins across most samples in each dataset. Statistical analyses revealed higher oxidative phosphorylation and lipid metabolism in responders than in non-responders in both treatments. To elucidate the effects of the metabolic state on the immune response, we examined melanoma cells upon metabolic perturbations or CRISPR-Cas9 knockouts. These experiments indicated lipid metabolism as a regulatory mechanism that increases melanoma immunogenicity by elevating antigen presentation, thereby increasing sensitivity to T cell mediated killing both in vitro and in vivo. Altogether, our proteomic analyses revealed association between the melanoma metabolic state and the response to immunotherapy, which can be the basis for future improvement of therapeutic response.
In Brief
Proteomic profiling of melanomas from patients undergoing immunotherapy reveals key mediators of tumor immunogenicity.
Graphical Abstract
METHODS:
STAR★METHODS
LEAD CONTACT AND MATERIALS AVAILABILITY
Further information and requests for resources and reagents should be directed to and will be fulfilled by the Lead Contact, Tamar Geiger (geiger@tauex.tau.ac.il).
Plasmids generated for the study are available from the Lead Contact.
EXPERIMENTAL MODEL AND SUBJECT DETAILS
Tumor sample collection
Archival formalin-fixed paraffin-embedded (FFPE) tissues from 42 metastatic melanoma patients treated with TIL-based adoptive cell transfer were included in this study, 40 which were treated with the “Young TIL” protocol and 2 which were treated with the “Selected TIL” protocol. Patients were categorized into 21 responders (complete or partial regression) and 21 non-responders (progressive disease), as evaluated by standard Response Evaluation Criteria In Solid Tumors (RECIST v1.0) guidelines. All patients provided their informed consent according to the Israel Ministry of Health Approval no. 3518/2004. FFPE tissue samples from 74 metastatic melanoma patients treated with anti-PD1 immunotherapy were included in the anti-PD1 cohort. The patients were categorized into 40 responders, 27 non-responders and 7 stable disease patients according to multidisciplinary radiologic evaluations. Samples were taken shortly before the initiation of the indicated treatment (except for 2 samples taken 11 or 18 days after starting treatment). Clinical information of each patient is included in Table S1.
Cell lines
For super-SILAC mix, the following cell lines were cultured in SILAC-medium devoid of lysine and arginine and supplemented with the heavy version of these amino acids. WM266–4, WM115, and A375 were cultured in SILAC-DMEM (Biological Industries) supplemented with 10% dialyzed FBS (Biological Industries), 1 mM sodium pyruvate, 4 mM L-Glutamine, 1% essential amino acids, and antibiotics. Mel526 and Mel624 were cultured in SILAC-RPMI medium (Biological Industries) supplemented with 10% dialyzed FBS (Biological Industries), 1 mM sodium pyruvate, 2 mM L-Glutamine, 25 mmol/l HEPES pH 7.2, and antibiotics. Lys8 concentrations were 73 μg/mL, and Arg10 concentrations were 33.6 μg/mL (for WM266, A375, mel526 and mel624) or 28 μg/mL (for WM115). After 10 doublings, successful incorporation of the labeled amino acids was determined by MS analysis. Cell line authentication for WM266–4, WM115, and A375 was performed at the Genomics Core Facility of BioRap Technologies and the Rappaport Research Institute in Technion, Israel. Short tandem repeat (STR) profiles were determined using the Promega PowerPlex 16 HS kit.
For cell line metabolic and genetic perturbation experiments, WM266–4 cells were cultured in DMEM supplemented with 4 mM L-Glutamine, antibiotics, and 10% FBS. Mel526 cells were cultured in DMEM or RPMI supplemented with 4 mM L-Glutamine, antibiotics, and 10% FBS. Mel76 and Mel04 cells were cultured in RPMI supplemented with 4 mM L-Glutamine, antibiotics, and 10% FBS. YUMMER1.7 (clone D4J) cells were cultured in DMEM F12 supplemented with 4 mM L-Glutamine, antibiotics, 10% FBS, and non-essential amino acids. Cells were treated with the following inhibitors: 30 mM Sodium dichloroacetate (DCA; and PBS as control), 3 μM avasimibe, 100 μM etomoxir, 200 nM rotenone, 250 nM antimycin or 50 nM oligomycin. DMSO treatment was used as vehicle control for all mitochondrial inhibitors. Cells were cultured with each inhibitor / vehicle for 72 h prior to cell lysis or flow cytometry.
Mel76, Mel04 and TIL14 were obtained from surgically excised melanoma specimens (IRB approval no.3518/2004). For the co-culture assay, TIL14 cells were cultured in special TIL medium supplemented as previously described.
YUMMER1.7 (clone D4J) was generated from YUMM1.7 cells by UV irradiation and single cell clonal selection. The method of generation of the line was previously described. It was verified as diploid and evaluated for tumor formation in C57BL/6J mice and for response to anti-PD-1 and anti-CTLA-4.
METHOD DETAILS
Proteomics sample preparation
For clinical sample preparation, slides (6–10 μm thick) from FFPE blocks were macro-dissected, deparaffinized with xylene and washed with ethanol. The sample preparation of the TIL cohort was as follows: The extracted tissues were lysed with 4% sodium dodecyl sulfate (SDS), 0.1 M Tris pH 7.6, and then boiled for 10 min at 95°C, sonicated and centrifuged at 17,000 × g. For super-SILAC standard preparation, the heavy labeled cells were lysed with the same buffer and boiled for 10 min at 95°C. Following protein determination using the BCA protocol (Pierce), the heavy labeled super-SILAC standard lysate and the tumor lysates were mixed at a 1:1 ratio and the total protein lysate was trypsin-digested on 30 kDa filters (Millipore) using the filter-aided sample preparation (FASP) protocol. Proteins were denatured on filters in 8 M urea, reduced using 100 mM DTT, and alkylated using 50 mM iodoacetamide, followed by overnight digestion with sequencing grade trypsin (Promega; 1:50 enzyme to protein ratio). Peptides were then acidified with 1% trifluoroacetic acid, separated into six fractions using strong anion exchange (SAX) chromatography in a stage tip format and then purified on C-18 (3M) stage tips. The sample preparation of the anti-PD1 cohort was as follows: The extracted tissues were lysed with 50% 2–2-2 trifluoroethanol (TFE), 25mM ABC. Samples were boiled for 1 h at 99°C, sonicated and centrifuged at 20,000 × g. Following protein determination using the Bradford protocol, the heavy labeled super-SILAC standard lysate (in the same buffer) and the tumor lysates were mixed at a 1:1 ratio and the total protein lysate was trypsin-digested using in-solution digestion protocol. Proteins were reduced using 5 mM DTT, alkylated with 15 mM iodoacetamide, diluted with 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate followed by overnight digestion with Lys-C-Trypsin mix (1:100 enzyme to protein ratio) and trypsin (Promega; 1:50 enzyme to protein ratio). Peptides were then acidified with 1% trifluoroacetic acid, separated into five fractions using strong cation exchange (SCX) chromatography in a stage tip format and then purified on C-18 (3M) stage tips.
For cell line experiments, cells were lysed upon reaching ~70%–90% confluence using 6 M urea and 2 M thiourea in 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate in at least 3 biological replicates. Protein concentrations were determined using the Bradford assay and the proteins were digested in-solution. Specifically, lysates were reduced with 1 mM DTT, alkylated with 5 mM iodoacetamide, diluted 1:4 with 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate, and digested over-night with Lys-C-Trypsin mix (1:100 enzyme to protein ratio) and trypsin (1:50 enzyme to protein ratio). Next, peptides were acidified with TFA and purified on C-18 stage tips (3M).
LC-MS-based proteomics
LC-MS/MS runs were performed on the EASY-nLC1000 UHPLC (Thermo Scientific) coupled to the Q-Exactive Plus or Q-Exactive HF mass spectrometers (Thermo Scientific). Peptides were separated with a 50 cm EASY-spray PepMap column (Thermo Scientific) using a water-acetonitrile gradient of 220 min or 140 min for the TIL and the anti-PD1 tumor sample fractions, respectively, with a flow rate of 300 nL/min at 40°C. The gradient for the cell line single shots was 240 min long. Buffer A was 0.1% formic acid, and buffer B was 80% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid. For the different SAX fractions of the TIL tumor samples, the gradient was modified according to the pH of the fraction: 5%–25% buffer B (pH 11), 7%–27% buffer B (pH 8, 6 and 5), and 7%–33% buffer B (pH 3 and 4). For the different fractions of the anti-PD1 tumor samples the gradient was modified as follows: 5%–25% for fraction 1–2; 7%–28% for fraction 3–4; 7%–33% for fraction 5. For the cell line single shots, the gradient was 5%–28% or 7%–28% buffer B. The resolutions of the MS and MS/MS spectra were 70,000 and 17,500 for Q-Exactive Plus, respectively. The resolutions of the MS and MS/MS spectra were 60,000 and 30,000 for Q-Exactive HF, respectively. The m/z range was set to 300–1700 or 380–1800 Th. MS data were acquired in a data-dependent mode, with target values of 3E+06 and 1E+05 or 5E+04 for MS and MS/MS scans, respectively, and a top-10 method.
Immunohistochemistry (IHC) staining
FFPE tumor blocks were obtained from the Institute of Pathology at the Sheba Medical Center. For ACAT1, ACOT1, HADHA, FABP7, MITF and SDHA staining, 3.5 μm consecutive sections were mounted on the positively charged glass slides and dried overnight at 37°C. For each protein, 4–5 tumor blocks from the TIL cohort were stained per group (responder / non-responder), except for SDHA (10 slides per group). After deparaffinization and rehydration, staining was performed using BOND-RX automated staining platform (Leica Biosystems), following selected protocol for the Bond Polymer Refine Red Detection Novocastra kit (Leica Biosystems). The kit was selected to ensure proper contrast with endogenous pigmentation. For CD3 and CD8 staining, tissue sections (4 μm) were processed by a fully automated protocol on a Benchmark XT staining module (Ventana Medical Systems Inc., USA). Briefly, after sections were deparaffinized and rehydrated, a CC1 Standard Benchmark XT pretreatment for antigen retrieval (Ventana Medical Systems Inc., USA) was selected for CD3 and CD8. For each protein, 5–6 tissue blocks were stained per group (responder / non-responder). Slides were scanned using the Leica Aperio VERSA Digital Pathology Scanner (Aperio Technologies Inc.). Staining quantification was performed using the Aperio eSlide Manager software via the Aperio Cytoplasmic Algorithm (ACAT1, ACOT1, HADHA, FABP7, MITF and SDHA) or the Aperio Membrane Algorithm (CD3 and CD8 staining). Areas enriched by cancer cells (as defined by a pathologist) were manually annotated and subsequently analyzed by optimized cytoplasm algorithm (Leica Biosystems). Percentage of positively stained cells were used for downstream statistical analysis. The correlation between the different staining was calculated patient-wise using corrplot R code (Pearson correlation analysis).
CRISPR-Cas9 gene knockout
All guide-RNA sequences were selected from the Genescript website and were previously verified. In total 5–6 guide RNAs were examined for each gene, and only those that induced knock out or knock down (as indicated by proteomic analysis) were used. For the human gene knock outs, the gRNAs were cloned into PX459 vector (Addgene plasmid # 62988), which contains the Cas9 enzyme from S. pyogenes upstream of the human U6 promoter, a puromycin resistance gene for mammalian selection and ampicillin resistance gene for bacterial selection. The cloned vectors were sequence verified and transfected into WM266–4 or Mel526 cells at 80%–90% confluence followed by puromycin selection for 2 to 4 weeks. For the murine gene knockout the gRNAs were cloned into PX458-GFP vector, which contains the Cas9 enzyme, U6 promoter, GFP tag and ampicillin resistance gene for bacterial selection. All 6 gRNAs were transfected together into YUMMER1.7 (clone D4J) cells, following selection by flow cytometry. All gene knockouts were confirmed using mass spectrometry analysis. Empty vector without gRNA served at the control.
For Mel526 cells: ACAT1 KO-1 was derived from ACAT1 gRNA sequence #3; ACAT1 KO-2 was derived from ACAT1 gRNA sequences #1–6; CPT1A KO-1 was derived from CPT1A gRNA sequences #1–6; CPT1A KO-2 was derived from CPT1A gRNA sequence #5; CPT1A KO-3 was derived from CPT1A gRNA sequence #6; HADHA KO-1 was derived from HADHA gRNA sequence #1; HADHA KO-2 was derived from HADHA gRNA sequence #2. For WM266–4 cells: ACAT1 KO-1 was derived from ACAT1 gRNA sequence #1; ACAT1 KO-2 was derived from ACAT1 gRNA sequence #6; CPT1A KO-1 was derived from CPT1A gRNA sequence #1; CPT1A KO-2 was derived from CPT1A gRNA sequence #6; CPT1A KO-3 was derived from CPT1A gRNA sequence #4; HADHA KO-1 was derived from HADHA gRNA sequence #1; HADHA KO-2 was derived from HADHA gRNA sequence #2. For YUMMER 1.7 cells: Acat1 KO was derived from all six Acat1 gRNA sequences.
T cell killing assay
T cell killing was assayed using LDH cytotoxicity. Briefly, 1 × 104 target cells were co-incubated with effector cells (TIL14) at Effector:Target ratios of 10:1 for 18 h. Cytotoxicity was determined by measuring lactate dehydrogenase (LDH) release with the CytoTox-ONE Homogeneous Membrane Integrity Assay (Promega, USA) according to manufacturer’s instructions. Percent of specific killing of target cells was calculated using the equation: (experimental-effector spontaneous release-target spontaneous release) x100 / (target maximum release -target spontaneous release).
Tumor growth assessment and tumor digestion
For tumor growth analysis, 1 × 105 Acat1-KO and control YUMMER1.7 (D4J) cell lines were suspended in 100 μL of PBS and then injected subcutaneously into C57BL/6 mice (Jackson Laboratory). All mouse experiments were performed according to approved procedures of the Salk institute of Biological Studies Institutional Animal Care and Use Committee. At indicated time points, Acat1-KO and control tumors were collected and minced in HBSS containing collagenase IV (sigma) and DNase (sigma) and digested at 37°C for 30 min. The digested tissues were then filtered, and single cell suspensions were incubated with ACK lysis buffer (Invitrogen) for 2 min to lyse red blood cells. The cells were then re-suspended in complete RPMI for subsequent analyses.
Flow cytometry analysis
For the human cell lines, FACS analysis was performed as follows: Cells were scraped upon reaching up to 90% confluence. Cell pellets were then washed and incubated with HLA antibodies at a 1:10 ratio in FACS buffer containing 1% FBS, 0.1% sodium azide in PBS. Measurements were performed using the Gallios flow cytometer (Beckman Coulter). Three biological replicates were analyzed, each with technical triplicates.
For the YUMMER 1.7 D4J cell line analysis the protocol was performed as follows: Acat1-KO and control D4J cells were grown to 70% confluence and scraped using ice-cold PBS. Cell pellets were stained with Live/Dead fixable Red (Invitrogen) followed by surface staining with H2-kb/H2-kd and Pdl1 in FACS buffer (PBS containing 1% FBS, 0.1% sodium azide). For digested tumor samples, single cell suspensions were stained with Live/Dead fixable Red (Thermo Fisher Scientific) in PBS followed by surface staining with antibodies in FACS buffer. For intracellular staining, single cell suspensions were stimulated with PMA (50ng)/Ionomycin (500ng) in the presence of Brefeldin A (BD Biosciences) for 4 h. After fixation and permeabilization, following manufacturer’s recommendations, cells were stained for intracellular cytokines. All samples were acquired on a BD LSRII flow cytometer and analyzed with FlowJo software.
RNA expression analysis of MHC class I
For the human cell lines: total RNA was isolated using Tri RNA reagent (Bio-Lab, Israel) according to the manufacturer’s instructions. RNA concentration and purity were determined by spectrophotometry and RNA Integrity by electrophoresis. For gene expression analysis 1 μg of total RNA was reverse transcribed using QScript cDNA Synthesis Kit (Quantabioscience, USA) according manufacturer’s instructions. The cDNA pools were generated with a QScript cDNA Synthesis Kit (Quantabioscience, USA) according manufacturer’s instructions. HLA-A, HLA-B and HLA-C gene expression was measured by real-time PCR using a taqman assay (Biosearch Technologies, USA). All reactions were carried out using the StepOnePlus Real-Time PCR System (Thermo Fisher, USA). The real-time PCR reactions were run in triplicates and normalized to TFRC expression as endogenous control. Relative expression was determined using the 2−ΔΔCt method.
For the YUMMER 1.7 D4J cell line: 3X105 cells were treated with 10 ng/mL IFNγ for 24 h, followed by RNA preparation using RNeasy Plus Mini Kit (QIAGEN). 1μg of total RNA was reverse transcribed using the High Capacity cDNA Reverse Transcription Kit (Thermo Fisher Scientific). 5 ng of cDNA was used to perform qPCR using Fast SYBR Green Master Mix (Thermo Fisher Scientific) and indicated primer on CFX384 Touch Real-Time PCR Detection System (Bio-Rad). Four technical replicates were performed for each biological sample, and expression values of each replicate were normalized against β-Actin cDNA using the 2−ΔΔCt method.
MitoTracker staining and imaging
Mel526 and WM266–4 cell lines were seeded in 96-well glass bottom plates (P96–1.5H-N, Cellvis, CA, USA). A labeling solution of MitoTracker® Deep Red FM (M22426, Thermo Fisher Scientific) was prepared from a 1 mM stock (in DMSO), which was diluted in growth medium to a final concentration of 100 nM. Live cells were stained for 30 min at 37°C, followed by a 5 min wash in PBS. Cells were fixed with 4% paraformaldehyde solution for 15 min at room temperature and washed again for 5 min in PBS. Cells were then stained with DAPI (0.5 μg/mL) for 10 min at room temperature and washed again. Imaging was performed immediately after staining using SP8 inverted confocal microscopy (Leica Microsystems, Wetzlar, Germany) equipped with a Leica HC PL APO CS2c × c63/1.4 NA objective. Excitation and emission ranges: DAPI 405 (415–455), MitoTracker 633 (647–665). 3D reconstructions and deconvolution were performed in LAS-AF software.
Seahorse measurements
WM266–4 or Mel526 CRISPR cells were seeded in a poly-D-lysine-coated XF96 microplate at a density of 20,000 cells per well and incubated at 37°C for 24 h. Basal oxygen consumption rate (OCR), maximal OCR and spare respiratory capacity were measured in the XFe96 Extracellular Flux Analyzer (Seahorse Bioscience, Agilent) using Mito stress assay. For data normalization, cells were fixed and stained using methylene-blue after each experiment.
QUANTIFICATION AND STATISTICAL ANALYSIS
Proteomics raw MS data processing
Raw MS data were processed using MaxQuant version 1.5.2.10 for the TIL dataset and 1.5.6.9 for the anti-PD1 dataset and all the cell line perturbations. Database search was performed with the Andromeda search engine using the human Uniprot database. Forward/decoy approach was used to determine the false discovery rate (FDR) and filter the data with a threshold of 1% FDR for both the peptide and the protein levels. The settings included carbamidomethyl cysteine as a fixed modification and methionine oxidation and N-terminal acetylation as variable modifications. The “match between runs” option was enabled to transfer identification between separate LC-MS/MS runs based on their accurate mass and retention time after retention time alignment. The settings for the SILAC-labeled tumor sample runs included Lys-8 and Arg-10 as heavy labels and the re-quantify option was enabled.
Proteomics statistical analysis
All statistical tests and calculations were performed using Perseus, MATLAB, R or Prism. For all proteomic analyses, the proteinGroups output table was used. Reverse proteins, proteins that were only identified by site, and potential contaminants (excluding keratins) were filtered out. For the clinical tumor data, normalized ratio tumor/SILAC data were log2-transformed and the protein groups were filtered to have at least 70% valid values, reaching a list of 4588,4620 or 4416 protein groups for the TIL, the anti-PD1 or the combined datasets respectively, which were further used for all downstream analyses. Dataset integration was based on gene name; multiple entries for the same gene name were integrated to a single entry by calculating the median expression value. Data were normalized by subtracting most frequent value in each sample. To extract DEPs between responders and non-responders multiple comparisons were performed; a two-sample Student’s t test was performed with a p value threshold of 0.05 for each of the two datasets, following by 2D annotation enrichment test with FDR q-value 0.02 to derive the differential functional groups in each of the two datasets. A two-sample Student’s t test with a permutation-based FDR q-value of 0.1 and S0 of 0.1 was performed for the anti-PD1 dataset or the combined dataset of both treatments, to extract significantly changing proteins. Enrichment analyses were performed with Fisher’s exact test with a FDR q-value < 0.02. Weighted gene co-expression network analysis (WGCNA) was performed on the entire 116 sample dataset using R code implemented in Perseus software using signed network, cor correlation function and power = 10. The Kaplan-Meier survival analyses were performed in MATLAB using log-rank test. Proteomaps were constructed using a web tool based on the t test difference values without log2 transformation. Protein network was based on a STRING output and was visualized in Cytoscape. Principal component analysis was performed after data imputation by replacing missing values with random values that create a normal distribution with a downshift of 1.8 or 1.6 standard deviations and a width of 0.3 or 0.4 of the original ratio distribution for the TIL and the anti-PD1 datasets, respectively. The imputed data were also used for support vector machine (SVM) analyses in Perseus, to find a minimal signature that segregated between responders and non-responders in each dataset. For classification, we used radial basis function (RBF) kernel and feature ranking was performed with ANOVA with S0 of 0.01 or 0.05 for the TIL or anti-PD1 datasets, respectively. Cross-validation was performed by random sampling of 85% of the samples as a training set and testing the classifier on the remaining 15%; this process was repeated 250 times. After protein ranking, the signature was selected based on accuracy (determined according to the area under the ROC curve) of the top-ranked proteins. Accordingly, the top 8-ranked and 15-ranked proteins were selected as the final signatures for the TIL and the anti-PD1 datasets, respectively.
For the cell line metabolic perturbations, label-free quantification normalization data were used after log2 transformation. To find DEPs between DCA-treated and control cells, for each comparison the data were filtered to retain only proteins with valid values in at least 70% of the samples. Following that, two sample Student’s t test was performed with a permutation-based FDR q-value threshold of 0.05 and S0 of 0.1. Integration of multiple t tests was based on gene name; multiple entries for the same gene name were integrated into a single entry by calculating the median expression value. In the CRISPR analysis, for each comparison the data were filtered to retain only proteins with valid values in at least 70% of the samples. Following that, missing data were replaced using imputation based on the assumption of normal distribution with a downshift of 1.6 standard deviations and a width of 0.4 of the original ratio distribution. To find DEPs between CRISPR control and CRISPR KO cells two-sample Student’s t test was performed with FDR q-value threshold of 0.05 and S0 of 0.1. The following 1D annotation enrichment test was performed on the fold change with Benjamini-Hochberg FDR q value < 0.02. Data integration from multiple t tests was based on gene name; multiple entries for the same gene name were integrated into a single entry by calculating the median expression value.
RNA -sequencing data analysis
Published RNA-sequencing data of anti-CTLA-4 treated patients was kindly provided by Prof. Schadendorf and Dr. Eliezer M. Van Allen. Published RNA-seq data of anti-PD1 treated patients was downloaded from the GEO database (GEO: GSE78220.) Published RNA-seq data of the TIL dataset was downloaded from the GEO database (GEO; GSE100797). All mRNA data were analyzed using log2 data after filtering for at least 70% valid values. The following gene annotations were added: GOBP, GOMF, GOCC and KEGG. The 2D annotation enrichment test was calculated on the fold change between responders and non-responders in each RNA dataset or proteomics dataset (Benjamini-Hochberg FDR q-value < 0.05; one test per RNA dataset).
DATA AND CODE AVAILABILITY
Data resources
The accession number for the MS proteomics data reported in this paper is PRIDE repository: PXD006003.