ABSTRACT:
Autism Spectrum Disorder (ASD) is a set of heterogeneous neurodevelopmental conditions defined by impairments in social communication and restricted, repetitive behaviors, interests or activities. Only a minority of ASD cases are determined to have a definitive etiology and the pathogenesis of most ASD is poorly understood. We hypothesized that a global analysis of the proteomes of human ASD vs. control brain, heretofore not done, would provide important data with which to better understand the underlying neurobiology of autism. In this study, we characterized the proteomes of two brain regions, Brodmann area 19 (BA19) and posterior inferior cerebellum (CB), from carefully selected idiopathic ASD cases and matched controls using label-free HPLC-tandem mass spectrometry. The data revealed marked differences between ASD and control brain proteomes for both brain regions. Unlike earlier transcriptomic analyses using frontal and temporal cortex, however, our proteomic analysis did not support ASD attenuating regional gene expression differences. Bioinformatic analyses of the differentially expressed proteins between cases and controls highlighted canonical pathways involving glutamate receptor signaling and glutathione-mediated detoxification in both BA19 and CB; other pathways such as Sertoli cell signaling and fatty acid oxidation were specifically enriched in BA19 or CB, respectively. Network analysis of both regions of ASD brain showed up-regulation of multiple pre- and post-synaptic membrane or scaffolding proteins including glutamatergic ion channels and related proteins, up-regulation of proteins involved in intracellular calcium signaling, and down-regulation of neurofilament proteins, with DLG4 and MAPT as major hub proteins in BA19 and CB protein interaction networks, respectively. Upstream regulator analysis suggests neurodegeneration-associated proteins drive the differential protein expression for ASD in both BA19 and CB. Overall, the proteomic data provide support for shared dysregulated pathways and upstream regulators for two brain regions in human ASD brain, suggesting a common ASD pathophysiology that has distinctive regional expression.
METHODS:
Methods
Subjects and samples
Brain samples were procured from the Autism Tissue Program (ATP, www.atpportal.org) through the Harvard Brain Tissue Resource Center (www.brainbank.mclean.org) and the National Institute for Child Health and Human Development Brain and Tissue Bank (www.btbank.org). The samples were used in accordance with the principles of the Declaration of Helsinki. Tissues were procured from a total of 9 ASD and 9 control subjects. Brain samples from both cases and controls are from the left posterior inferior cerebellar hemispheric cortex (CB) and BA19 (occipital) cortex. The samples from autism cases were obtained from validated cases of ASD who met detailed inclusion/exclusion criteria; controls were matched for gender, age, brain region and post-mortem interval (Supplementary Table 1). All 9 ASD brains were evaluated for FMR1 nucleotide repeat expansion mutation, by two chromosomal microarray analyses, and with RNA-Sequencing based transcriptomic analyses; 8 of the 9 ASD brains were subject to deep sequencing of 78 known ASD candidate genes. The result of this detailed characterization of the ASD cases was that 8 of 9 ASD cases did not have an identified pathogenic chromosomal lesion or monogenic disorder that might account for ASD; one case (ANO9714) has an etiologically relevant DNA sequence variant, SCN2A c.4543C > T, p.R1515*. Eight of the 9 ASD cases, therefore, meet criteria for idiopathic autism. Tissue for proteomic analyses was available from 9 ASD and 9 control subjects for CB and from 7 ASD and 6 control subjects for BA19.
Global label-free expression proteomic analysis
Samples were rinsed in 100 mM Tris pH 8.0, transferred to a Covaris cryobag and frozen in liquid nitrogen, pulverized, transferred to glass vials, and then lysed with 2% SDS and 0.1% protease inhibitor cocktail (Sigma-Aldrich, St. Louis, MO). Samples were then sonicated, followed by filter-aided sample preparation detergent clean-up. 10 mcg protein of each sample were digested with LysC for 1 hour and trypsin overnight at 37 °C. Reverse phase LC-MS/MS was performed as described except that 600 ng of peptide digests were loaded on the HPLC column and the gradient of solvent B ranged from 2% to 40% over 210 min.
Raw LC-MS/MS data files for each sample were processed using Rosetta Elucidator (Rosetta Biosoftware, Seattle, WA) (Version 3.3.01 SP4 25). Automated differential quantification of peptides was performed as previously described. Briefly, LC-MS/MS raw data were imported, and for each MS spectrum profile of each LC-MS/MS run, chromatographic peaks and monoisotopic masses were extracted and aligned. Chromatographic peaks were first aligned by retention time and monoisotopic mass. Peak lists with the monoisotopic mass and corresponding MS/MS data were then generated for each sample and searched using Mascot (Matrix Science, London, UK; version 2.4.1). Resultant peptide identifications were imported into Elucidator and monoisotopic masses annotated with peptide identifications. The false discovery rate for protein identifications was calculated to be 2%. The MS/MS peak lists were searched by Mascot using the human UniProt database. Search settings were as follows: trypsin enzyme specificity; mass accuracy window for precursor ion, 25 ppm; mass accuracy window for fragment ions, 0.8 Da; variable modifications including carbamidomethlylation of cysteines, one missed cleavage and oxidation of methionine.
Statistical methods
MS data were obtained for each region; these files contained intensity values, with rows corresponding to peptides and columns corresponding to the sample. Missing values were imputed using a weighted k-nearest neighbors algorithm. Next, data were log2-transformed to improve symmetry and normal distribution approximation. Data were visualized with principal component analysis. One outlier was noted (BA19_6994) and removed from subsequent analyses. These preprocessing steps were performed using InfernoRDN. As the principal component analysis showed clear separation of samples based on brain region, data from each brain region were separately used for subsequent statistical and bioinformatic analyses.
To increase statistical power, we treated individual peptides as observations of a given protein. Data were imported into the R statistical programming environment for subsequent analyses. Using the lme4 package, a linear mixed effects model was applied to each protein with the following form:where intensity refers to the log2-transformed intensity values for each peptide observed for that protein, condition a binomial categorical variable (ASD or Control), PMI and age are continuous variables, peptide is a multilevel random effects categorical variable with the number of levels dependent on the protein, and ε is independent normally-distributed residual error with mean 0 and standard deviation σ. PMI data were unavailable for 3 samples, so these were assumed to be missing at random and imputed using predictive mean modeling, to allow use of all available intensity data in our model. For determination of proteins that varied significantly with changing PMI, we excluded these samples when running the model. A likelihood ratio was constructed for each coefficient in the model to assess its contribution to the variance in the data, and p-values were obtained. An additional analysis comparing regional contributions to differential expression within region, a binomial categorical variable, was run on the ASD and control datasets. P-values were adjusted using the false discovery rate (FDR) method described by Benjamini and Hochberg (BH). Multiple proteins were identified as cell type-specific markers. To assess potential contributions of cellular heterogeneity, these cell type-specific markers were assessed for differential expression through both the aforementioned regression model and separately with paired t-tests comparing expression changes between the paired autism and control samples. The pairs were compared using averages of the peptide intensities to reflect the specific protein concentration in each sample.
Bioinformatics analyses
Differentially expressed proteins identified by at least two unique peptides underwent bioinformatic analysis. Network, pathway, and upstream regulator analyses were performed for each brain region with Ingenuity Pathway Analysis® (IPA, www.qiagen.com/ingenuity); proteins with unadjusted p-value < 0.05 were used for this purpose. Enrichment scores and p-values for canonical pathway and upstream regulator analyses were determined by a one-tailed Fisher’s exact test using the Ingenuity Knowledge Base as a reference. The latter is a database that is curated by expert reviewers that includes sets of member molecules of canonical pathways and downstream targets of upstream regulators, as well as all known interactions, direct and indirect, between proteins (http://pages.ingenuity.com/rs/ingenuity/images/IPA_data_sheet.pdf). Enrichment scores of above 1.3 correspond to a p-value < 0.05. Canonical pathway p-values were adjusted for multiple comparisons using the Benjamini-Hochberg (BH) procedure. Networks of protein-protein interactions were curated based on data from CNS and immune cell lines and tissues. The IPA bioinformatics tool generated interaction networks of the differentially expressed proteins through an iterative algorithm focused on interconnectivity between network members based on the Ingenuity Knowledge Base.
Results from IPA pathway analyses were validated using the open-source bioinformatics tool Reactome (https://reactome.org). P-values for Reactome-generated pathways from over-representation analysis were adjusted for multiple comparisons using the Benjamini Hochberg procedure.
Targeted MS analysis with selective reaction monitoring
Validation of the global proteomic data was done through selected reaction monitoring MS to quantify the levels of several differentially expressed proteins noted in the global, label-free proteomic analysis. The targeted MS analysis was performed as described previously. One or two peptides from each of 11 proteins of biological interest was synthesized (Sigma-Aldrich, St. Louis, MO) and used as a labeled internal standard that was spiked into each brain homogenate sample and used to quantify its unlabeled peptide analogue and thereby compute the concentration of the protein containing that peptide. Analysis of the selected peptides between the targeted and untargeted analyses was done using one-tailed Wilcoxon signed-rank tests. A p-value of 0.1 was considered significant given the nature of using Wilcoxon signed-rank tests on a small number of samples. Metrics assessed included consistency in directionality of expression between the label-free global vs. targeted analyses as well as whether statistical significance of differential expression was maintained. The peptides that were quantified, their amino acid sequences, and the proteins that they belong to are indicated in Supplementary Table 7.