ABSTRACT:
abscisic acid (ABA) is a key phytohormone regulating plant development and stress response. The signal transduction of ABA largely relies on protein phosphorylation. However; little is known about the phosphorylation events occurring during ABA signaling in rice thus far. By employing a label-free; MS (Mass Spectrometry)-based phosphoproteomic approach; we identified 2271 phosphosites of young rice seedlings and their intensity dynamics in response to ABA; during which 1060 proteins were found to be differentially phosphorylated. Western-blot analysis verified the differential phosphorylation pattern of D1, SMG1 and SAPK9 as indicated by the MS result; suggesting the high reliability of our phosphoproteomic data. The DP (differentially phosphorylated) proteins are extensively involved in ABA as well as other hormone signaling pathways. It is suggested that ABA antagonistically regulates brassinosteroid (BR) signaling via inhibiting BR receptor activity. The result of this study not only expanded our knowledge of rice phosphoproteome, but also shed more light on the pattern of protein phosphorylation in ABA signaling.
METHODS:
4. Methods
4.1. ABA Treatment
Fourteen-day-old Nipponbare young seedlings were obtained from pure water culture in a growth chambers (28 °C, 90% relative humidity, 14 h daytime and 10 h night time). For the ABA treatment, healthy, intact young seedlings were kept in a beaker with water containing 100 µM ABA (Sigma, St. Louis, MO, USA). The whole seedling samples were collected at CK, 3 and 12 h respectively, and immediately used for RNA isolation and protein extraction.
4.2. RNA Isolation and qRT-PCR (Quantitative Real Time-Polymerase Chain Reaction)
The total RNA of the whole young seedlings was extracted by Trizol (Invitrogen, Carlsbad, CA, USA) according to the manufacturer’s instructions. DNaseI (Takara, Dalian, China) was added in the total RNA for eliminating DNA contamination. The DNA free total RNA was quantified by a Nanodrop spectrometer (Thermo, Waltham, MA, USA) and 2 µg RNA was used for each reverse transcription by using M-MLV reverse transcriptase (Takara, Dalian, China) with Oligo(dT)20 (Invitrogen, Carlsbad, CA, USA) as primer. Quantitative real-time RT-PCR analysis was conducted in a total volume of 10 µL containing 2 µL reverse-transcribed product above, 0.2 µM each primer and 5 µL THUNDERBIRD SYBR® qPCR Mix (Toyobo, Shanghai, China) on a CFX96 touch realtime PCR detection system (Bio-Rad, Hercules, CA, USA). The ubiquitin (GenBank accession No. AF184280) was used as an internal control. The relative expression level of tested genes was calculated based on Ct values by following the 2−ΔΔCt method. Primers sequences are as follows: Ubif: 5′-GCTCCGTGGCGGTATCAT-3′; Ubir: 5′-CGGCAGTTGACAGCCCTAG-3′; Rab16af: 5′-GAGGGAGGAGCACAAGACC-3′ and Rab16ar: 5′-ATTCCATCATCCTCAGAC GAG-3′.
4.3. Protein Extraction
Three grams of each sample was ground into fine powder in liquid nitrogen, homogenized well in 15 mL PEB buffer (0.9 M Sucrose, 0.5 M Tris-HCl, 0.05 M EDTA, 0.1 M KCl, 2% β-Mercaptoethanol, pH = 8.7), extracted with same volume of saturated phenol (pH = 4.2) by shaking on ice for 30 min. The extracted proteins in the phenol phase were precipitated in 5 volumes of ice-cold PS (Precipitation Solution) buffer (0.1 M Ammonium Acetate, 1% β-Mercaptoethanol, in 100% Methanol), washed in 75% ethanol for three times and finally dissolved in PBS (Phosphate Buffer Saline) buffer (137 mM NaCl, 2.7 mM KCl, 10 mM Na2HPO4, 2 mM KH2PO4).
4.4. Protein Digestion and Phosphopeptide Enrichment
The procedures were done as described by Qiu et al. (2016). Briefly, protein was treated for a sequential of 5 mM DTT (DL-Dithiothreitol) reduction, 20 mM IAA (indole-3-acetic acid) alkylation and again DTT reduction in the dark. The treated proteins were digested on the 30 kDa filter unit (Millipore, Darmstadt, Germany) over night with trypsin at pH = 8.0 (enzyme:protein = 1:50). After the filter-aided sample preparation (FASP), peptides were desalted using C18 Sep-Pak (Waters, Milford, MA, USA) and redissolved in binding buffer (80% ACN, 5% TFA, 1 M laccaic acid). Subsequently, peptides were incubated with TiO2 beads (GL sciences, Tokyo, Japan) with a ratio of peptide:TiO2 = 1:4 for 3 × 30 min, washed with binding buffer, and then eluted with the elution buffer (40% ACN, 15% NH3H2O) 4 times. Eluates were subsequently vacuum dried and reconstituted with 5% MeOH in 1% C solution for LC-MS/MS analysis.
4.5. LC-MS/MS (Liquid Chromatograph-Mass Spectrometer/Mass Spectrometer) and Data Analysis
This was done by following the methods of Qiu et al. (2016) in Beijing Proteome Research Center. LC-MS/MS analyses were performed on an Easy-nLC 1000 liquid chromatography system (Thermo, Waltham, WA, USA) coupled to a Q-Exactive Plus via a nano-electrospray ion source (Thermo). The peptide mixture was eluted from a 360-µm ID × 2 cm, C18 trap column and separated on a homemade 100 µm ID × 10 cm column (C18, 1.9 µm, 120 Å, Maisch GmbH) with a linear 5%–35% acetonitrile gradient at 500 nL/min. Survey scan were acquired after accumulation of 8.06 × 102 ions in Orbitrap for m/z 300–1400 using a resolution of 70,000 at m/z 400. The top 20 intense precursor ions were selected for fragmentation in the HCD cell at normalized collision energy of 27%, and then fragment ions were transferred into the Orbitrap analyzer operating at a resolution of 17,500 at m/z 400. The dynamic exclusion of previously acquired precursor ions was enabled at 18 s. Raw spectral data were processed for phosphopeptide identification and phosphosite quantification in Proteome Discoverer 1.4.1.14 suites with Mascot search engine against the rice genome annotation project database: (). The mass tolerance was set at 20 ppm for precursor, and 50 mmu for the tolerance of product ions. Oxidation (M), Acetyl (Protein-N term) and Phospho (S/T/Y) were set as variable modifications, and Carbamidomethyl (C) as static modification in the Mascot searches for phosphopeptides. Two missed cleavage on trypsin was allowed. The results were filtered for peptide at high identification confidence (False discovery rates < 1%) and E Value < 0.05 by the Percolator tool of the Protein Discoverer package. Low-scoring peptides (Mascot score ≤ 20) were excluded from the analysis when they were not further supported by additional high-scoring identifications in other replicates or experiments. All phosphopeptide hits were automatically re-analyzed by the phosphoRS software within the Protein Discoverer software suite. PhosphoRS probability higher than 90% was required for a phosphorylation site to be considered as localized. Only those peptides which were phosphorylated in at least two of the three biological replicates were considered as truly phosphorylated. The phosphorylation is quantified based on the peak area under the ion intensity by using precursor ions area detector in PD1.4.1.14. Extracted ion chromatogram (sum of areas under the curves of MS1 chromatograms of each peptide identified) was used for normalization across all runs. Within-group means were calculated to determine fold changes. The differentially phosphorylated protein was defined to have over two fold changes in the average intensity with credible student’s t-test (p < 0.05). The mass spectrometry proteomics data have been deposited to the ProteomeXchange Consortium via the PRIDE partner repository with the dataset identifier PXD004939.
4.6. Western-Blot Analysis
To dephosphorylate the proteins, each 20 µg protein sample was treated by 1 µL of calf intestinal alkaline phosphatase (Takara, Dalian, China) at 37 °C for 2 h. Western-blot analysis was performed as described by Qiu et al. 2016. Briefly, 20 µg denatured total protein was resolved in 10% SDS (sodium dodecyl sulfate)-polyacrylamide gels. Then, the separated proteins bands were transferred onto a 0.45 µm polyvinylidene fluoride fluoropolymer (PVDF) membrane (Millpore, Darmstadt, Germany) by using an electrophoretic blotting system (Bio-Rad, Hercules, CA, USA). The target protein bands were sequentially detected with corresponding primary antibodies (1:1000 dilution), secondary antibody IgG conjugated with a HRP (Horseradish Peroxidase) (1:10,000 dilution), and visualized by using the enhanced chemiluminescence (Pierce, Waltham, WA, USA). Anti-D1, anti-SAPK9 and anti-SMG1 were synthesized by Genescript Company (Shanghai, China), while anti-β-tubulin (Cat No. M20005, Abmart, Berkeley, CA, USA), anti-GST (Cat: CW0085, CWBIO, Beijing, China) and anti-His (Cat: CW0083, CWBIO, Beijing, China) were commercially purchased. Quantification of the band intensities on the immune-blots was performed using the ImageJ software (v2.1.4.7) according to the instructions (). All the sample intensities were first normalized to the control tubulin, and then calculated based on the ratio to set the relative level of CK into 1.