ABSTRACT:
Background
The study of the gut microbiota (GM) is rapidly moving towards its functional characterization by means of shotgun meta-omics. In this context, there is still no consensus on which microbial functions are consistently and constitutively expressed in the human gut in physiological conditions. Here, we selected a cohort of 15 healthy subjects from a native and highly monitored Sardinian population and analyzed their GMs using shotgun metaproteomics, with the aim of investigating GM functions actually expressed in a healthy human population. In addition, shotgun metagenomics was employed to reveal GM functional potential and to compare metagenome and metaproteome profiles in a combined taxonomic and functional fashion.
Results
Metagenomic and metaproteomic data concerning the taxonomic structure of the GM under study were globally comparable. On the contrary, a considerable divergence between genetic potential and functional activity of the human healthy GM was observed, with the metaproteome displaying a higher plasticity, compared to the lower inter-individual variability of metagenome profiles. The taxon-specific contribution to functional activities and metabolic tasks was also examined, giving insights into the peculiar role of several GM members in carbohydrate metabolism (including polysaccharide degradation, glycan transport, glycolysis, and short-chain fatty acid production). Noteworthy, Firmicutes-driven butyrogenesis (mainly due to Faecalibacterium spp.) was shown to be the metabolic activity with the highest expression rate and the lowest inter-individual variability in the study cohort, in line with the previously reported importance of the biosynthesis of this microbial product for the gut homeostasis.
Conclusions
Our results provide detailed and taxon-specific information regarding functions and pathways actively working in a healthy GM. The reported discrepancy between expressed functions and functional potential suggests that caution should be used before drawing functional conclusions from metagenomic data, further supporting metaproteomics as a fundamental approach to characterize the human GM metabolic functions and activities.
Electronic supplementary material
The online version of this article (doi:10.1186/s40168-017-0293-3) contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.
METHODS:
Methods
Samples
Stool samples were collected from 15 healthy Sardinian volunteers (8 females and 7 males) from the SardiNIA cohort population. Briefly, the SardiNIA study investigates genotypic and phenotypic aging-related traits in a longitudinal manner. All residents from 4 towns (Lanusei, Arzana, Ilbono, and Elini) in a valley in Sardinia (Italy) were invited to participate. Since November 2001, a total of 6921 individuals aged 18–102 (>60% of the population eligible for recruitment in the area) were recruited and the majority of them (n = 6602) have been assessed for ~13.6 million genetic variants. As detailed in Additional file 1: Table S1, the median age of the studied subjects at the time of sampling was 39 years (range 22–48), while their median body mass index (BMI) value was 23.2 (range 18.4–31.2), with a global distribution widely comparable to that of the general Italian population at the time of sampling (source: ISTAT 2014). All samples were immediately stored at −80 °C, then transferred to the Porto Conte Ricerche laboratories in dry ice, and stored again at −80 °C until use. Then, samples were thawed at 4 °C and, from each of them, two equal stool portions (weighing approximately 250 mg each) were collected, of which the first was subjected to DNA extraction for MG analysis and the second underwent protein extraction for MP analysis.
DNA sample preparation and metagenome sequencing
DNA extraction was undertaken using the QIAamp DNA Stool Mini Kit (Qiagen, Hilden, Germany), according to the manufacturer’s protocol.
Libraries were constructed according to the Nextera XT kit (average insert size ~700 bps) and sequenced with the HiScanSQ sequencer (both from Illumina, San Diego, CA, USA), using the paired-end method and 93 cycles of sequencing.
Metagenome bioinformatics
Merging and filtering of paired reads were carried out using tools from the USEARCH suite v.8.1.1861 as described previously. The mean length of the paired-end merged reads was 134 bps. Since sequencing depth may affect estimation of the relative abundances of gene categories, filtered reads were subjected to random subsampling using the fastx_subsample command (sample_size 200000). A subsequent evaluation of the taxonomic and functional information depth revealed that 96% of taxa and 98% of KEGG functions with relative abundance >0.01% in the non-subsampled dataset were maintained upon subsampling. Taxonomic annotation was performed using MEGAN v.5.11.3. Read sequences were preliminary subjected to DIAMOND (v.0.7.1) search against the NCBI-nr DB (2016/03 update), using the blastx command with default parameters. Then, DIAMOND results were parsed using MEGAN to perform lowest common ancestor classification according to default parameters.
Functional annotation was carried out through a DIAMOND blastx search (top hit and e-value threshold 10−5) against bacterial sequences from the UniProt/Swiss-Prot database (release 2015_12), followed by retrieval of KEGG orthologous group information associated with each UniProt/Swiss-Prot accession number.
The relative abundance of a taxon/function in a subject was calculated by summing the number of reads assigned to that taxon/function and then by dividing the taxon/function read count by the total read count of the subject. Only taxa and functions with a relative abundance higher than 0.01% were considered for subsequent differential analysis.
Protein sample preparation and mass spectrometry analysis
Samples were resuspended by vortexing in an SDS-based extraction buffer, heated, and then subjected to a combination of bead-beating and freeze-thawing steps, as illustrated elsewhere. Protein extracts were reduced, alkylated, and digested on-filter according to the filter-aided sample preparation (FASP) protocol, with slight modifications reported earlier.
An LTQ-Orbitrap Velos mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific, San Jose, CA, USA) interfaced with an UltiMate 3000 RSLCnano LC system (Thermo Scientific) was used for LC-MS/MS analysis. Peptide separation by LC was carried out as previously described, while the mass spectrometer was set up in a data-dependent MS/MS mode with HCD as fragmentation method, as detailed elsewhere.
Metaproteome bioinformatics
Peptide identification was performed using Proteome Discoverer (version 1.4; Thermo Scientific), with Sequest-HT as search engine and Percolator for peptide validation (FDR <1%). Search parameters were set as described previously, while the sequence database was composed of the open reading frames (ORFs) found using FragGeneScan (v.1.19, with the training for Illumina sequencing reads with about 0.5% error rate) starting from the MG reads obtained in this study, upon clustering at 100% using the dedicated USEARCH tool (25,328,860 sequences in total).
All ORFs matched with at least an MS spectrum upon database searching (average length 42 amino acids) were subjected to taxonomic and functional classification, following the same procedure described above for the whole metagenome sequences (“Metagenome bioinformatics” section), except using the DIAMOND blastp command instead of blastx.
The relative abundance of a taxon/function in a subject was calculated by summing the number of MS spectral counts matched to all ORFs assigned to that taxon/function and then by dividing the taxon/function count by the total MS spectral counts for all taxa/functions detected in that subject (so that the sum of the abundances of all taxa/functions detected in each subject is 1). Only taxa and functions with a relative abundance higher than 0.01% were considered for subsequent differential analysis.
Statistical analysis and graph generation
Bray-Curtis dissimilarity values were computed using the R package “vegan.” The Wilcoxon signed-rank test (R package “stats”) was applied with continuity correction to compare Bray-Curtis dissimilarity values between MG and MP. The extent of differential abundance of each feature between two groups (MG versus MP or Firmicutes versus Bacteroidetes) was calculated for each subject and expressed as a relative abundance log ratio, using a correction factor (CF = 10−5) to eliminate discontinuity due to missing values. The global log ratio was intended as the mean of the log ratios calculated for each subject. The sets of log ratios were further tested for significant deviation from zero using the one-sample t test, and an FDR correction was performed on the nominal two-tailed P values following the Benjamini-Hochberg method (α = 0.05), as reported previously, using the SGoF+ tool v.3.8.
PCA plots and heatmaps were generated using ClustVis (http://biit.cs.ut.ee/clustvis), boxplots were created using BoxPlotR (http://shiny.chemgrid.org/boxplotr), GraphPad Prism (v.5.03) was employed for bar graph generation, and cladograms were produced using GraPhlAn and edited using Inkscape (https://inkscape.org). KEGG pathway maps were customized by uploading KO numbers through the “user data mapping” function on the KEGG website (http://www.kegg.jp).
Additional files