ABSTRACT:
The “deep” proteome has been accessible by mass spectrometry for some time. However, the number of proteins identified in cells of the same type has plateaued at ∼8000–10 000 without ID transfer from reference proteomes/data. Moreover, limited sequence coverage hampers the discrimination of protein isoforms when using trypsin as standard protease. Multienzyme approaches appear to improve sequence coverage and subsequent isoform discrimination. Here we expanded proteome and protein sequence coverage in MCF-7 breast cancer cells to an as yet unmatched depth by employing a workflow that addresses current limitations in deep proteome analysis in multiple stages: We used (i) gel-aided sample preparation (GASP) and combined trypsin/elastase digests to increase peptide orthogonality, (ii) concatenated high-pH prefractionation, and (iii) CHarge Ordered Parallel Ion aNalysis (CHOPIN), available on an Orbitrap Fusion (Lumos) mass spectrometer, to achieve 57% median protein sequence coverage in 13 728 protein groups (8949 Unigene IDs) in a single cell line. CHOPIN allows the use of both detectors in the Orbitrap on predefined precursor types that optimizes parallel ion processing, leading to the identification of a total of 179 549 unique peptides covering the deep proteome in unprecedented detail.
METHODS:
Methods
Tissue Culture and Cell Lysis
The MCF-7 breast cancer cell line was cultured in DMEM medium (Sigma, no. D6546) supplemented with 10% FCS, 1% penicillin, 1% streptomycin, and 1% glutamine at 37 °C (5% CO2). Five T175 tissue culture flasks of confluent MCF-7 cells were harvested using a trypsin solution (Sigma, no. T3924), washed two times in PBS, and stored at −80 °C until use. The frozen cells were lysed on ice for 30 min in 5 mL of RIPA lysis buffer (Thermo Pierce, no. 89901) supplemented with 4% SDS, 6 M urea, 2 M thiourea, 100 mM DTT, protease, and phosphatase inhibitors (Roche nos. 11836170001 and 04906837001). The lysate was sonicated twice for 1 min (5 s on, 10 s off, repeated four times). After the addition of 1250 units of benzonase (Sigma, no. E1014), the lysate was incubated on ice for 20 min and centrifuged at 21 000 g for 20 min at 4 °C and the pellet discarded. Because of the presence of SDS and DTT in the sample, protein content was estimated by SDS-PAGE and Coomassie staining.
Sample Preparation and Fractionation
Approximately 5 mg of protein was digested using the GASP method. In brief, the lysate was mixed with 30% acrylamide, polymerized, and shredded. The gel slurry was fixed in methanol/acetic acid/water (50/40/10%) and washed twice with alternating 6 M urea and 100% acetonitrile to remove SDS. 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate was added to the gel. The gel slurry was split equally into two by volume for digestion by separate enzymes. 100% acetonitrile was added to dehydrate the gel and was removed prior to the addition of 50 μg of trypsin (Promega, no. V5111) or 50 μg of elastase (Worthington Biochemical, no. LS006365). The samples were incubated at 37 °C overnight and further processed as according to the original GASP method to extract peptides from the shredded gel pieces. The samples were desalted on C18 solid-phase extraction cartridges (Sep-Pak plus, Waters) and resuspended in 2% acetonitrile 0.1% formic acid and peptide concentration determined using a peptide quantitation kit (Thermo Pierce, no. 23275).
Off-line high-pH reverse-phase prefractionation was performed on 800 μg of digested material using the loading pump of a Dionex Ultimate 3000 HPLC with an automated fraction collector and a XBridge BEH C18 XP column (3 × 150 mm, 2.5 μm pore size, Waters no. 186006710) over a 100 min gradient using basic pH reverse-phase buffers (A: water, pH 10 with ammonium hydroxide; B: 90% acetonitrile, pH 10 with ammonium hydroxide). The gradient consisted of a 12 min wash with 1% B, then increasing to 35% B over 60 min, with a further increase to 95% B in 8 min, followed by a 10 min wash at 95% B and a 10 min re-equilibration at 1% B, all at a flow rate of 200 μL/min with fractions collected every 2 min throughout the run. 100 μL of the fractions was dried and resuspended in 20 μL of 2% acetonitrile/0.1% formic acid for analysis by LC–MS/MS. Fractions were loaded on the LC–MS/MS following the concatenation scheme shown in Figure 1B with adjusted sample volumes to analyze ∼1 μg on column.
Mass Spectrometry Analysis Methods
Peptide fractions were analyzed by nano-UPLC–MS/MS using a Dionex Ultimate 3000 nano-UPLC with EASY-Spray column (75 μm × 500 mm, 2 μm particle size, Thermo Scientific) with a 60 min gradient of 0.1% formic acid in 5% DMSO to 0.1% formic acid to 35% acetonitrile in 5% DMSO. MS data were acquired with an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos instrument using the methods described below. A comprehensive description of the method can be found in the Supporting Information in addition to method transcripts and Xcalibur (Tune v. 2.0.1258.14) methods files.
Universal Method
The Universal method has been developed by Eliuk et al. to maximize peptide identification without method optimization for different sample complexities and abundances. In principle, it allows a long ion accumulation time for low abundance precursors with parallel usage of quadrupole, collision cell, and both Orbitrap (FT) and ion trap (IT) detectors (summarized in Figure 1A).
MS scans were acquired at a resolution of 120 000 between 400 and 1500 m/z and an AGC target of 4.0E5. MS/MS spectra were acquired in the linear ion trap (rapid scan mode) after collision-induced dissociation (CID) fragmentation at a collision energy of 35% and an AGC target of 4.0E3 for up to 250 ms, employing a maximal duty cycle of 3 s, prioritizing the most intense ions and injecting ions for all available parallelizable time. Selected precursor masses were excluded for 30 s.
CHOPIN
CHarge Ordered Parallel Ion aNalysis (CHOPIN) employs selection criteria to channel ions to the best suited detector based on precursor ion properties (Figure 1A). The hallmark of CHOPIN is the simultaneous use of both mass detectors for peptide fragment spectra acquisition, which allows the generation of additional MS/MS scans in the Orbitrap at no cost of duty cycle time. Because only high abundant precursors with higher charge states are analyzed in the Orbitrap after high collision energy dissociation (HCD) fragmentation, the success rate of these scans is very high. At the same time, the higher sensitivity of the ion trap is used to analyze low abundant precursor ions. Details and further description of the method used here have been exported into text format and are available in the Supporting Information.
In brief, MS scans were acquired as above. For precursor selection, we prioritized the least abundant signals. Doubly charged ions were scheduled for CID/IT analysis with the same parameters applied as above. Charge states 3–7 with precursor intensity >500 000, however, were scheduled for analysis by a fast HCD/FT scan of maximal 40 ms (15 000 resolution). The remaining charge-state 3–7 ions with intensity <500 000 were scheduled for analysis by CID/IT, as described above. Selected precursor masses were excluded for 12 s, as the gain in MS/MS scan events allows repeated scans of the same precursor across the chromatographic peak without risking undersampling.
Elastase Digests
The elastase digested samples have been analyzed with divergent parameters to address the occurrence of singly charged peptide ions. In the CHOPIN method we added a fourth scan event for singly charged precursor ions to be scanned with a HCD/FT scan, increased collision energy (32% instead of 25%), and a longer injection time (100 ms instead of 40 ms).
However, the “no enzyme” database searches benefit from high mass accuracy MS/MS spectra, so we modified the Universal Method to replace the low mass accuracy CID/IT scans for MS/MS data acquisition for 2 HCD/FT scan types recognizing singly charged and multiple charged ions. Because the resulting method does not exactly conform to the parameters of the Universal method anymore, we refer to results obtained with this method as “Universal/FT” and highlight the difference where appropriate. Full details about the method have been exported into text format and are available in the Supporting Information.
Data Analysis
The general workflow of sample processing and identification of MS/MS spectra is shown in Figure S1. CHOPIN produces raw files containing HCD/FT and CID/IT spectra. To allow searching the data in PEAKS, we separated both spectra types into separate MGF files by Proteome Discoverer (V. 2.0) using the top 10 (HCD/FT) and top 15 (CID/IT) peaks in every 100 m/z window. CID/IT spectra derived from CHOPIN or Universal Method were then searched in Peaks 7.5 using the default target decoy approach with 20 ppm mass error tolerance for the precursor and 0.5 Da for fragment masses while HCD/FT spectra were searched with a 0.05 Da mass tolerance for fragment masses. The selection of a 20 ppm mass accuracy tolerance allowed the inclusion of correctly identified peptides for which the 13C isotope peak was wrongly assigned as monoisotopic precursor mass. These identifications will show as deamidated peptides with a larger mass error. The mass error distribution of deamidated peptides is visualized in Figure S5, showing the population of truly deamidated peptides and wrongly assigned precursor masses.
We allowed up to four missed cleavage sites and no nonspecific cleavage for tryptic samples and set propionamide as fixed cysteine modification and variable modification on lysine and N-termini as well as Deamidation (N,Q) and Oxidation (M) and maximal 1 variable modification per peptide in the de novo and database searches (three variable PTMs for PTM search nodes). The database used was in all cases the UniProt Reference (UPR) Homo sapiens database (retrieved 15.10.2014). The elastase digest and Post Digest Mix data were searched with no enzyme specificity. Peptide false discovery rate (FDR) was adjusted to 1% and proteins grouped according the parsimony principle described by Nesvizhskii and Aebersold. Subsequently, the protein identification score threshold was adjusted to achieve a protein FDR of ∼1%. The score thresholds for peptide and protein FDRs as well as identification metrics are shown in Table 1. Because HCD/FT and CID/IT spectra had to be searched individually to appreciate the different fragmentation types and mass accuracies, the results were combined post-search. The result combination includes the following major steps: (i) Read all of the PSMs identified from two sample files, including the ones from both target and decoy databases. (ii) Tune the PSM scores accordingly to make sure the scores of PSMs from different samples are normalized identically. More specifically, the PSM score thresholds at 1% FDR of both samples were calculated; then. using one of the thresholds as the base score, the PSM scores in the other sample were shifted according to the difference between the two score thresholds. (iii) Put all PSMs together and carry out the protein inference algorithm for protein grouping. (iv) Recalculate protein scores and coverage rates. The same procedure was applied to generate single or accumulating results from the prefractionated sample sets.
Data density was visualized by using the Perseus software (v. 1.5.3.0) platform.