ABSTRACT:
The impact of different approaches for spectral library generation used by DIA was analyzed on identification and quantification level using a gold standard spike-in data set. We included approaches using repetitive measurements of the original samples as well as methods applying peptide and protein pre-fractionation before library generation. The comparisons show, that prefractionation generally increases the number of identified peptides and protein groups, whereas the ground truth quantification ratios could be well approximated using libraries generated by repetitive measurements.
Graphical Abstract
Highlights
Provision of data generated on the basis of a gold standard spike-in sample set.
Choice of spectral library has great impact on identification and quantification.
DIA is superior to DDA in quantification reproducibility, specificity and accuracy.
DIA outperforms DDA in the quantification of low protein amounts.
Quantification on peptide level is generally preferable.
Currently data-dependent acquisition (DDA) is the method of choice for mass spectrometry-based proteomics discovery experiments, but data-independent acquisition (DIA) is steadily becoming more important. One of the most important requirements to perform a DIA analysis is the availability of suitable spectral libraries for peptide identification and quantification. Several studies were performed addressing the evaluation of spectral library performance for protein identification in DIA measurements. But so far only few experiments estimate the effect of these libraries on the quantitative level.
In this work we created a gold standard spike-in sample set with known contents and ratios of proteins in a complex protein matrix that allowed a detailed comparison of DIA quantification data obtained with different spectral library approaches. We used in-house generated sample-specific spectral libraries created using varying sample preparation approaches and repeated DDA measurement. In addition, two different search engines were tested for protein identification from DDA data and subsequent library generation. In total, eight different spectral libraries were generated, and the quantification results compared with a library free method, as well as a default DDA analysis. Not only the number of identifications on peptide and protein level in the spectral libraries and the corresponding DIA analysis results was inspected, but also the number of expected and identified differentially abundant protein groups and their ratios.
We found, that while libraries of prefractionated samples were generally larger, there was no significant increase in DIA identifications compared with repetitive non-fractionated measurements. Furthermore, we show that the accuracy of the quantification is strongly dependent on the applied spectral library and whether the quantification is based on peptide or protein level. Overall, the reproducibility and accuracy of DIA quantification is superior to DDA in all applied approaches.
Data has been deposited to the ProteomeXchange repository with identifiers PXD012986, PXD012987, PXD012988 and PXD014956.
METHODS:
Experimental Procedures
Sample Preparation
Frozen C2C12 cells were warmed up within a water bath (37 °C) and taken into culture in a 58 cm2 Petri dish (Sarstedt, Nümbrecht, Germany) within 10 ml DMEM (Gibco®, Thermo Fisher) standard medium containing 15% (v/v) FCS (Gibco®), 2% (v/v) sodium pyruvate (Biochrom, Berlin, Germany), 1% (v/v) non-essential amino acids (Biochrom) and 1% (v/v) penicillin/streptomycin (Pan Biotech, Aidenbach, Germany). The cells were cultivated in an incubator (37 °C, 5% CO2), the medium was changed every 2 days and the cells were split at a confluency of approx. 70%. For this, the cells were washed with 5 ml PBS (Gibco®), then detached with 1.5 ml 0.05% Trypsin/1 M EDTA (Gibco®) for 3 min inside the incubator and further the activity of trypsin was stopped by the addition of standard medium.
Before lysis, cells were pelleted by centrifugation at 16,000 × g for 10 min and then lysed in 30 mm TrisHCl, pH 8.5, 7 m urea and 2 m thiourea using glass beads and sonication (4 × 1 min on ice). After lysate transfer into a fresh tube, glass beads were washed with distilled water, the resulting solution was combined with the lysate (resulting in 5.3 m urea and 1.5 m thiourea concentrations) and cleared by centrifugation at 16,000 × g for 10 min.
As spike-in proteins we chose 13 non-mouse proteins with varying physico-chemical properties (see supplemental Table S1 for detailed information and UniProt accessions): human α-synuclein, β-lactoglobulin from bovine milk, fibrinogen α, β and γ from human plasma (Merck Millipore, Darmstadt, Germany), glucose oxidase from Aspergillus niger, human hemoglobin α and β, lipases 1, 2 and 3 from Candida rugosa, lysozyme from chicken egg white and myoglobin from equine skeletal muscle (Sigma-Aldrich, part of Merck KGaA, Darmstadt, Germany, unless otherwise stated). The fibrinogen α, β and γ were contained in the same solution, as were the hemoglobin α and β and the lipases 1, 2 and 3 respectively. Therefore, the relative amounts of these proteins are equal in all spike-in levels. The spike-ins were combined in a manner to yield in a comparable overall sample amount and physiologically plausible protein concentrations.
The gold standard spike-in sample set (GS) consisting of five samples was prepared as follows: a constant amount of C2C12 lysate as background matrix was spiked with varying amounts of the 13 spike-in proteins in 50 mm ammonium bicarbonate (AmBic) as specified in Table I.
For spectral library generation (in-solution digest, protein fractionation and peptide fractionation) C2C12 lysate was mixed with equal amounts of the spike-in proteins (called master mix, MM, in the following) as specified in supplemental Table S2.
In-solution Tryptic Digestion
GS samples, MM for the in-solution and peptide fractionation library (sample composition as specified in Table I and supplemental Table S2) were prepared as follows.
After reduction with dithiothreitol (DTT, final concentration of 5 mm) for 20 min at 56 °C proteins were alkylated with iodoacetamide (13.75 mm final concentration) at ambient temperature for 30 min in the dark. Samples were diluted with 50 mm AmBic to an urea concentration <1.5 M and digestion was carried out using trypsin (Serva, Heidelberg, Germany) at an enzyme to substrate ratio of approx. 1:27 at 37 °C overnight. The digestion was stopped by adding trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) to a final concentration of 0.5%. After centrifugation the supernatant was collected, and the peptide concentration was determined by in-house amino acid analysis (AAA). Before LC-MS/MS analysis was performed, the iRT kit provided by Biognosys, which is required for DIA analysis using Biognosys' SN, was added according to the manufacturer's instructions. In brief, solubilized iRT peptides were diluted 1:10 in 0.1% TFA and 1 μl was added to each sample.
Protein Fractionation by SDS-PAGE and In-gel Tryptic Digestion
For protein fractionation by SDS-PAGE the MM sample (composition as specified in supplemental Table S2) was reduced and alkylated as described in In-solution Tryptic Digestion. Per lane, 40 μg were loaded onto an Invitrogen™ Bolt™ 4–12% Bis-Tris Plus Gel (Thermo Fisher Scientific) and proteins were separated at 200 V in MOPS buffer. After staining with SimplyBlue SafeStain (Thermo Fisher Scientific) each lane was cut into 10 slices, which were destained before subjection to overnight trypsin digestion using 0,12 μg trypsin per gel slice. Peptides were eluted twice using 0.1% TFA: acetonitrile (ACN) 1:1. The supernatants of each fraction were combined, vacuum dried and resuspended in 0.1% TFA 10 different fractions. Before LC-MS/MS analysis, 0.5 μl of solubilized iRT peptides were added to each sample.
Peptide Fractionation by High pH Reversed Phase Chromatography
Peptide fractionation was done using the “Pierce High pH Reversed-Phase Peptide Fractionation Kit” (Thermo Fisher Scientific) according to the manufacturer's manual. In brief, the peptide sample prepared as described in In-solution Tryptic Digestion was vacuum-dried, resuspended in 300 μl 0.1% TFA and loaded onto the equilibrated column. Peptides were eluted stepwise with increasing ACN concentration in 0.1% triethylamine into 8 fractions, that were vacuum-dried and resuspended in 0.1% TFA. Finally, peptide concentrations were determined by in-house AAA. Before LC-MS/MS analysis, 0.5 μl of solubilized iRT peptides were added to each sample.
Mass Spectrometric Acquisition
All samples (library samples, DDA and DIA analysis samples) were analyzed using the following LC-MS/MS setup: For LC separation the nanoHPLC system Ultimate 3000 (Thermo Fisher Scientific) was used with a PepMap 100 C18 (100 μm ID × 2 cm, particle size 5 μm, pore size 100 Å; Thermo Fisher Scientific) as precolumn and a PepMap C18 (75 μm × 50 cm, particle size 2 μm, pore size 100 Å; Thermo Fisher Scientific) as analytical column. Peptides were separated by a 120 min gradient using 0.1% formic acid (FA) as buffer A and 84% ACN in 0.1% FA as buffer B. The gradient was run from 5% to 40% buffer B. Subsequently, peptides were ionized by electrospray ionization and transferred into a Q Exactive HF mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific). The capillary temperature was set to 250 °C and the spray voltage to 1600 V. The lock mass polydimethylcyclosiloxane (445.120 m/z) was used for internal recalibration.
For DDA MS runs (library generation and DDA analyses), the mass range of MS1 full scans was set to 350–1400 m/z with a resolution of 60,000 at 200 m/z (AGC 3 × 106, 80 ms maximum injection time). HCD fragmentation of the Top10 abundant precursor ions was performed at 27% NCE. The fragment analysis (MS2) was performed with a resolution of 30,000 at 200 m/z (AGC 1 × 106, 120 ms maximum injection time, 2.2 m/z isolation window).
For DIA MS runs, the MS1 full scans were performed at a mass range of 350–1400 m/z with a resolution of 120,000 at 200 m/z (AGC 3 × 106, 20 ms maximum injection time). Fragment analysis (MS2) was subdivided into 22 DIA isolation windows of equal width (49 m/z wide) using a resolution of 30,000 at 200 m/z (AGC 3 × 106, auto maximum injection time). Stepped collision energy was used (25.5%, 27 and 30% NCE).
Sample analyses, containing the spike-in proteins, in DDA and DIA mode were performed with 200 ng sample peptide amount (corresponding to ∼1 to 100 fmol spike-ins), whereas for library generation up to 800 ng of peptides per sample were injected.
The raw spectrometric data and the spectral libraries have been deposited to the ProteomeXchange Consortium (http://proteomecentral.proteomexchange.org) via the PRIDE partner repository with the data set identifiers PXD012986, PXD012987, and PXD012988.
Spectral Library Generation
DDA data were searched with PD using Mascot 2.5 (Matrix Science Ltd, London, UK,) as peptide search engine and Percolator for the refinement of target-decoy estimation.
A maximum of two missed cleavages was allowed.
The precursor tolerance was set to 5 ppm and the fragment tolerance to 20 mmu.
The cleavage enzyme Trypsin (cleavage at each K and R, unless followed by P) was used.
For all searches, DIA and DDA, the following common settings were used- as fixed modification, only aarbamidomethylation at C was set, whereas as variable modifications oxidation (M), Gln->pyro-Glu (N-terminal Q), deamidated (NQ), ammonium (DE) and ammonia-loss (N, N-terminal C) were allowed because of sample preparation 
For DDA identifications, a database consisting of the UniProt reference mouse proteome (release 2017_12, 52548 protein entries), the cRAP contaminants (unchanged since January 2015, 115 entries), the iRT protein for DIA retention time calibration and a database of the spike-in proteins was used. Additionally, to the 13 spiked-in proteins several proteins that were identified together with them in prior experiments (data not shown) were added to the database, containing altogether 160 protein accessions in the spike-in database (compare Statistical Analysis). Thus, the complete protein database used in this study contained 52,824 entries. The searches to create the spectral library were refined using Percolator, allowing only high confidence peptides in PD. Spectral libraries were generated using the spectral library generation function of SN using mostly the default settings. In brief, PD confidence level “high” was used for identification with SN protein inference enabled. Fragment ions between 300–1800 m/z, with minimum 3 amino acid length and minimum relative intensity of 5 were considered. Precursors with less than 3 fragment ions were removed. For the generation of SN Pulsar spectral libraries, DDA raw data were directly loaded into SN Pulsar and spectral library generation was done using the same settings as described for SN 11. An overview on all spectral libraries used in this work regarding library creation can be found in Fig. 2 and Table II (supplemental Table S3 shows some additional information like preparation time), and regarding library content (their constituting precursors, peptides and protein groups) in supplemental Table S5. In total, eight different libraries are described here; whereby the most complex spectral library “IS and F all 78” was created from DDA data of the other 5 non-Pulsar libraries and 6 additional measurements of the “MM IS 6” sample.
DDA Data Analysis Using OpenMS
DDA data were analyzed with a KNIME workflow using OpenMS and PIA nodes (workflows are deposited inside PRIDE with the data). In brief, MS/MS spectra were first converted into centroided mzML using the vendor algorithm of msConvert (ProteoWizard version 3.0.10112). Afterward, they were identified using the target-decoy approach with Mascot 2.5, MS-GF+ and X!Tandem and searches were combined using PIA, maintaining a peptide spectrum match and protein level false discovery rate of 1%. Peptide-features were detected and quantified using the FeatureFinderMultiplex. This algorithm uses the areas under the curves of the peptide isotope ion trails in the MS1 scans for the respective quantifications. The identifications were mapped to the features, aligned and normalized using the respective OpenMS nodes. Before the protein quantification using Top3 peptide abundancies, protein inference was conducted using PIA. The quantities for purely sequence based peptides was inferred from the quantities of peptides distinguishing different modifications and charge states by summing up the respective raw quantities, which is the default approach in OpenMS. The resulting peptide and protein quantifications were statistically analyzed as described below (see Statistical Analysis).
DIA Data Analysis Using Spectronaut 11 and Pulsar
DIA data were analyzed with SN 11 using the following settings. Calibration was set to non-linear iRT calibration with precision iRT enabled. Identification was performed using 1% q-value cutoff on precursor and protein level whereas the maximum number of decoys was set to a fraction of 0.5 of library size. The mass tolerance for matching precursor and fragment ions was set to dynamic (default), which lets SN determine the optimal value. For quantification interference correction was enabled with at least three fragment ions used per peptide, major and minor group quantities were set to mean peptide and mean precursor quantity, respectively with Top3 group selection each. Quantity was determined on MS2 level using area of XIC peaks with enabled cross run normalization. A complete description of all parameters can be found in supplemental Table S4.
In addition, DirectDIA was performed on the DIA data set with SN Pulsar using the same settings as described above.
Statistical Analysis
The quantitative data were exported from SN using an export schema, which allowed a statistical analysis for peptide and protein group relative abundancies. In the following we used all quantities, which had a valid value for at least one run, which is analogous to using the “sparse” setting in SN, unless stated otherwise. All data from the DIA and DDA measurements were analyzed by the same workflow using KNIME and R. The respective workflow can be found in the ProteomeXchange upload. On both levels, peptide and protein, the following analyses were conducted: first, missing values were imputed to a value of 0. The data were transformed using the inverse hyperbolic sine function (arcsinh), which has similar characteristics as the logarithm in the given numeric range but is defined for 0. Afterward, an analysis of variance (ANOVA) model was fitted to the transformed data. As a post-hoc test Tukey's honest significance test was conducted, to determine, which spike-in states were significantly differential. Finally, the ANOVA p values were corrected for multiple testing using the Benjamini-Hochberg procedure. To calculate the fold changes and log2 ratios between the spike-in states, the average quantities between the replicates for each state were calculated, leaving out the missing values instead of trying to impute them.
To account for impurities introduced by the spike-in protein solutions additionally to the 13 spike-in proteins 147 protein sequences were added to the protein database used for identifications. These proteins were identified by prior MS analyses of the spike-in protein solutions (data not shown), which were not highly purified. These “spike-in contaminants” are not expected to be found in all spike-in samples because of their low amount, but are nevertheless added to the protein database to allow an identification of the respective spectra. Thus, they are neither considered true positives (TP) nor false positives (FP) in the remaining analyses.
Besides these spike-in contaminants, there might be more peptides in the spike-in solutions, which could be detected and mapped to mouse proteins. To account for these FP, the abundancies of proteins, which are detected to be differential, were correlated to the known spike-in abundancies, using Pearson's correlation coefficient. The data were filtered if the correlation was higher than 0.9. Additionally, a fold change (FC) filter was applied, filtering out all candidates with relatively small FCs (FC < 1.3).
In all analyses, unless stated otherwise, the TP are the spike-in proteins, which were correctly identified to be differentially abundant. FP are detected as differential but are none of the spike-in proteins. To calculate the FP rate of the differential proteins, the number of differential FPs was divided by all differential proteins, i.e. the number of TP, the spike-in contaminants (which are regarded as TP in this calculation, as they obviously are regulated) and the FP.
The accuracy of differential abundance detection was assessed based on the mean absolute percentage error (MAPE), which is a percental measure for the deviation of all spike-in ratios from the theoretical ones. The formula for the calculation is:  where n is the number of possible abundance ratios (ten ratios for the five different states), At is the theoretical log2 value of the abundance ratio and Ft the median of the measured log2 ratios for the respective states. This allows to compare the accuracy of the quantifications using one objective value.
To compare the SN results with results generated by another tool, we performed an analysis using OpenSWATH. The analysis followed the basic tutorial settings of OpenSWATH using Mascot search results, iProphet for the combination of results, Mayu for the FDR estimation and spectraST for the actual library generation. The DIA data was analyzed by OpenSWATH and PyProphet and the quantified features were aligned using TRIC. For more information on the commands and parameters, see the supplementary file. The same KNIME workflow as for the SN and OpenMS data was used for the final analyses.
Experimental Design and Statistical Rationale
As described in the prior paragraphs a total of 78 LC-MS/MS runs were analyzed for the spectral library generation (compare supplemental Table S3, the number in the library names reflects the number of MS runs used for the creation of the library, the “MM IS 6” were additionally replicated with 800 ng and analyzed with the “IS and F all 78” library). For the DDA and DIA analysis, the described five spike-in states were measured in triplicates to reflect a common replicate number, resulting in 15 LC-MS/MS runs per method. For the retention time alignment of the DIA analyses, the iRT kit provided by Biognosis was applied, as described in Sample Preparation. MS1 and MS2 spectra were acquired for the DDA and DIA analyses as described in Mass Spectrometric Acquisition.