ABSTRACT:
While many aspects of archaeal cell biology remain relatively unexplored, systems biology approaches like mass spectrometry (MS) based proteomics offer an opportunity for rapid advances. Unfortunately, the enormous amount of MS data generated often remains incompletely analyzed due to a lack of sophisticated bioinformatic tools and field-specific biological expertise for data interpretation. Here we present the initiation of the Archaeal Proteome Project (ArcPP), a community-based effort to comprehensively analyze archaeal proteomes. Starting with the model archaeon Haloferax volcanii, we reanalyze MS datasets from various strains and culture conditions. Optimized peptide spectrum matching, with strict control of false discovery rates, facilitates identifying > 72% of the reference proteome, with a median protein sequence coverage of 51%. These analyses, together with expert knowledge in diverse aspects of cell biology, provide meaningful insights into processes such as N-terminal protein maturation, N-glycosylation, and metabolism. Altogether, ArcPP serves as an invaluable blueprint for comprehensive prokaryotic proteomics.
While archaeal proteomics advanced rapidly, a comprehensive proteome database for archaea is lacking. Therefore, the authors here launch the Archaeal Proteome Project, a community-effort providing insights into archaeal cell biology via the combined reanalysis of Haloferax volcanii proteomics data.
METHODS:
Methods
Datasets collected for H. volcanii
All datasets reanalyzed here were originally uploaded to PRIDE through ProteomeXchange or jPOST and are accessible via their corresponding PRIDE ID (Supplementary Data 3). Details about the analyzed strains, experimental conditions, MS instruments and settings can be found in Supplementary Note 7, Supplementary Table 2, Supplementary Data 1-2 as well as the corresponding publications (if available). Therefore, only a short summary of each dataset will be given here. The following datasets are considered analyses of whole proteomes: PXD006877, PXD007061, PXD009116, PXD011012, PXD011056, PXD011218, and PXD013046. For reference, the theoretical proteomes that had been exported from HaloLex and were used in some of the previous analyses have now been made available via Zenodo, together with the proteome that was used for all analyses within the ArcPP. The set of proteomes is available at 10.5281/zenodo.3565580. It should be noted that all used strains are direct descendants of the type strain DS2, which was used for genome sequencing and thus for the reference proteome.
Dataset PXD000202
This dataset has been previously published by Miranda et al.. Sampylation is a mechanism of ubiquitin-like protein modification in Archaea. H. volcanii encodes three ubiquitin-like small archaeal modifier proteins (SAMP1-3) that are covalently attached to target proteins by a mechanism that requires the E1-like activating enzyme UbaA. To map the sites of samp3ylation, in which the SAMP3 C-terminal Gly is covalently linked to the Ɛ-amino group of lysine residues of target proteins, the following strategy was used. Samp3ylated proteins were purified by α-Flag chromatography from cells expressing SAMP3 with an N-terminal Flag-tag. To improve the MS-based mapping of samp3ylation sites, the alanine residue (Ala90) immediately N-terminal to the diglycine motif of SAMP3 was modified to a lysine residue (A90K). This amino acid exchange allowed for scanning for GG-footprints derived from SAMP3 on tryptic peptides of the target protein by detecting mass increases of +114 Da. Samp3ylated proteins were purified from wild-type and compared with an isogenic E1 mutant (ΔubaA) deficient in the ability to activate the SAMPs for ubiquitin-like modification or sulfur mobilization. This latter strain enabled us to establish that the sites identified by MS analysis were dependent upon the E1 enzyme. H. volcanii strains were grown to stationary phase in ATCC974 complex medium (200-ml cultures). Clarified cell lysates were applied to equilibrated α-Flag columns, washed, and eluted with 100 μg ml−1 1X Flag peptide and collected in nine fractions. Wild-type and ΔubaA mutant strains expressing Flag-SAMP3A90K were analyzed in biological triplicate and duplicate, respectively. Proteins purified by α-Flag chromatography were separated by 15% nonreducing SDS-PAGE. Each gel lane was cut into 10 gel pieces and digested with trypsin. Peptide fragments were subjected to reversed-phase column chromatography operated on an Easy-nLC II connected to an LTQ Orbitrap-Velos mass spectrometer. Acquired MS/MS spectra were originally searched against a Uniprot H. volcanii DS2 proteome using the Sorcerer-SEQUEST platform. Cysteine carbamidomethylation, methionine oxidation, and diglycyl-lysine were set as variable modifications.
Dataset PXD006877
This dataset has been previously published by McMillan et al.. Multiplex quantitative stable isotope labeling in cell culture (SILAC) was used to monitor the changes in the H. volcanii proteome during hypochlorite stress. A double auxotroph for lysine and arginine (LM08) was generated and used to fully incorporate the heavy amino acids 13C/15N-lysine (+8 Da) and 13C-arginine (+6 Da) into each peptide. Cells were grown in GMM supplemented with the heavy vs. light amino acids (0.3 mM each). At late-log phase, cells were treated for 20 min with the oxidizing agent (2.5 mM NaOCl) vs. a mock (ddH2O) control. After treatment, harvested cell pellets of control and treatment groups were mixed at a 1:1 ratio (n = 4 biological replicates with a label swap). Proteins were extracted with TRIzol and solubilized in buffer (7 M urea, 2 M thiourea and 4% (w/v) CHAPS). After reduction with tris‐(2‐carboxyethyl) phosphine (TCEP), cysteine side chains were blocked by methyl methanethiosulfonate (MMTS) treatment. Digestion with trypsin was followed by desalting on a C18 reverse phase mini‐column. Eluted peptides were lyophilized and fractionated into 14 fractions by strong cation exchange chromatography (SCX). SCX fractions were analyzed one at a time on an Easy‐nLC 1200 system coupled to a Q Exactive Plus mass spectrometer. The original peptide identification and quantification was performed with Proteome Discoverer 2.1 using the Uniprot H. volcanii DS2 proteome. Methylthio was included as fixed modification and lysine + 8, arginine + 6, proline + 5, methionine oxidation, N‐terminal acetylation, and diglycine remnant on lysines as variable modifications.
Dataset PXD007061
This dataset has been previously published by Cerletti et al.. The whole proteome turnover was examined in the H. volcanii conditional LonB mutant (HVLON3) under reduced (−Trp) and nearly physiological (+Trp) LonB levels. HVLON3 was grown in Hv-Min medium containing 14NH4Cl as nitrogen source in absence of Trp and then switched to 15N-medium with and without Trp (±Lon) to monitor 15N-label incorporation into newly synthesized proteins over time. In parallel, the degradation of 14N-labeled proteins was estimated by comparing different time points with an internal standard grown on 13C-glucose. Membrane and cytoplasm proteins were prepared and processed by SDS-PAGE, digested with trypsin and analyzed by LC-MS/MS (nanoACQUITY gradient UPLC pump system coupled to an LTQ Orbitrap Elite mass spectrometer). Proteins were originally identified with Sequest embedded in Proteome Discoverer 1.4 searching against the HaloLex H. volcanii DS2 proteome (version 24-SEP-2013; 10.5281/zenodo.3565581). Protein turnover as well as statistical analyses were achieved with the online platform QuPE (https://qupe.cebitec.uni-bielefeld.de/QuPE/app). In addition, an in vivo cross-linking assay coupled to immunoprecipitation with ɑ-LonB antibody was performed in the H. volcanii H26 wt strain to detect interactions between LonB and its endogenous targets. The quantitative proteomics experiment was performed as a biological triplicate, while the immunoprecipitation was done with four biological replicates.
Dataset PXD009116
In this dataset, previously published by Cerletti et al., the proteomes of two halophilic archaea, H. volcanii H26 and N. magadii ATCC 43099, during exponential and stationary growth were compared. Cultures were grown at 42 °C, shaking at 200 rpm, in rich medium (MGM and Tindall medium, respectively) and membrane and cytoplasm fractions were obtained. Protein samples were processed, digested with trypsin, and subjected to LC-ESI-MS/MS using a nanoACQUITY gradient UPLC pump system (Waters) and an LTQ Orbitrap Elite mass spectrometer. Proteins were originally identified and quantified with MaxQuant (version 1.5.3.17) using the LFQ algorithm searching against the HaloLex H. volcanii DS2 proteome (version 24-SEP-2013; 10.5281/zenodo.3565581) and the HaloLex N. magadii ATCC 43099 proteome (January 2017; 10.5281/zenodo.3571186; contains 4295 entries, while 4023 were claimed). While N. magadii samples were included in the reanalysis for comparative purposes, only the raw data corresponding to samples from H. volcanii were used for the combined ArcPP dataset, comprising three and six biological replicates for the cytoplasm and membrane fractions, respectively.
Dataset PXD010824
This dataset has been previously published by Abdul Halim et al. and focuses on the analysis of HVO_0405. In order to test if HVO_0405 is a Tat substrate, its twin arginine was mutated to a twin lysine. For cells overexpressing either the WT HVO_0405 or the mutated sequence lacking the twin arginine sequence (both in a Δhvo_0405 background), membrane and cytosolic fractions of cells were isolated. After tryptic digestion, samples were analyzed with a Q Exactive Plus mass spectrometer after chromatographic separation on an UltiMate 3000 RSLCnano system and results were originally searched against the Uniprot H. volcanii DS2 proteome (UP000008243) employing Ursgal and allowing semi-enzymatic cleavage. For each sample, two biological replicates were performed.
Dataset PXD011012
This dataset was generated as part of the presented work. The proteome of planktonic and sessile cells at different stages of biofilm development are compared in this dataset. H. volcanii H53 liquid cultures were shaken at 250 rpm and grown to an OD600 of 0.3. After taking samples, the petri dishes were filled with 10 ml of the culture and incubated statically. After 24, 48, and 72 h, samples were taken from the planktonic phase, the remaining culture was discarded and the sessile cells (biofilm) were washed with 18% (w/v) salt water before scraping off the cells with a razor blade and collecting them in 18% (w/v) salt water. In addition to OD600 0.3, samples from the shaking culture were taken at OD600 0.08 and OD600 0.8. All samples were snap-frozen and stored at −80 °C. Each sample was transferred into 0.5 ml centrifugal filter units (Millipore) and lysed with 400 µl pure H2O containing protease inhibitors (1 mM PMSF and 1 mM benzamidine). The lysis step was repeated once with H2O and twice with 2% (w/v) SDS in 10 mM Tris/HCl pH 7.6 containing protease inhibitors as well, in order to solubilize membrane proteins. Proteins were digested separately with Trypsin and GluC using 50 µg each and following the FASP protocol, modified according to Esquivel et al.. Multiple, complemental proteases were chosen for increased protein identification and sequence coverage. After digestion, peptides were dried and then labeled with iTRAQ (4plex Applications Kit, AB Sciex) following the manufacturer’s protocol. Samples were mixed in combinations that allow for the analysis of proteomic changes over time in the planktonic phase, in the biofilm and between planktonic phase and biofilm.
Mass spectrometric analysis was performed as described with minor modifications. Briefly, samples were desalted on a C18 trap column and peptides were separated on a 50-cm C18 column (2 h gradient, 2–40% (v/v) acetonitrile) directly coupled to a Q Exactive Plus mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific). MS1 scan parameters were as follows: resolution 70,000, automatic gain control (AGC) target 1 × 106, maximum IT 50 ms, scan range 375–2000 m/z. The top 12 peaks were triggered for HCD fragmentation with a normalized collision energy of 30. MS2 scan parameters were as follows: resolution 17,500, AGC target 1 × 105, maximum IT 125 ms, fixed first mass 100 m/z. A dynamic exclusion list (20 s) was used and charge states 1 and >6 were excluded.
The results were originally analyzed with Ursgal employing the search engines X! Tandem, MS-GF+, MS Amanda and MSFragger. The database consisted of the UniProt H. volcanii DS2 proteome (UP000008243) and the following modifications were included: carbamidomethylation of cysteine (fixed), iTRAQ4plex of any N-terminus (fixed), iTRAQ4plex of tyrosine and lysine (optional), oxidation of methionine (optional). The experiment has been performed as biological triplicates.
Dataset PXD011015
In this dataset, previously published by Esquivel et al., the N-glycosylation of pilins and flagellins was characterized. For this purpose, flagellins and pilins were isolated from the supernatant by cesium chloride fractionation. After digestion with GluC, samples were chromatographically separated on an UltiMate 3000 RSLCnano system and analyzed with a Q Exactive Plus mass spectrometer. Two different methods were used: (i) in-source collision-induced dissociation (IS-CID) was applied, leading to the fragmentation of glycans before the MS1 scan, and precursor ions were selected for HCD fragmentation based on mass differences corresponding to monosaccharides; (ii) without IS-CID, the 12 most intense precursor ions were selected for HCD fragmentation. Results were originally analyzed with Proteomatic, searching against the Uniprot H. volcanii DS2 proteome (UP000008243) and including known H. volcanii N-glycans as potential modifications. The H53 wild-type was compared against a knockout strain of the oligosaccharyltransferase AglB and measurements were performed as biological triplicates for both strains.
Dataset PXD011050
This dataset, generated as part of this work, was aimed at the characterization of ArtA-dependent protein processing. On the one hand, the dataset used ΔartA deletion mutants overexpressing either the wild-type version or site-directed mutants of ArtA in order to determine the active site of ArtA. The plasmids that were transformed into the ΔartA deletion mutant AF103 to generate the overexpression strains are listed in Supplementary Data 4. For these strains, the S-layer glycoprotein was purified from the supernatant of exponentially grown cultures by cesium chloride fractionation as described previously. On the other hand, ArtA-dependent processing was compared for H53, ΔartA, and ΔpssA. The ΔpssA mutant FH54 was generated by transforming H53 cells with pFH38 as previously described. In this case, the supernatant and/or membrane fraction of exponentially grown cells have been isolated and used for protease digestion without further fractionation.
All samples were digested with Trypsin and/or GluC following the FASP protocol with minor changes. Peptides were reconstituted in 2% (v/v) acetonitrile, 0.1% (v/v) formic acid in H2O and separated on a C18 PepMap 100 column (15 or 50 cm), coupled to a Q Exactive plus mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific). MS1 spectra were acquired from 350 to 1600 m/z (or 375–2000 m/z) at a resolution of 70,000 with an injection time of 50–100 ms and an AGC target of 1 × 106 to 3 × 106. The 12 most intense ions were selected for HCD fragmentation with a normalized collision energy of 27 and fragment ions were analyzed in MS2 at 17,500 resolution, 55–120 ms injection time and 5 × 104 to 1 × 105 AGC target. Charge states 1 and >5 were rejected. Results were originally analyzed with Ursgal employing the engines X!Tandem, MSFragger, and MS-GF+ in a search against the Uniprot H. volcanii DS2 proteome (UP000008243). Semi-enzymatic cleavage was allowed in order to identify processing sites.
Dataset PXD011056
This dataset was previously published by Jevtic et al. and analyzed the proteomic response to environmental stress conditions. The chosen standard conditions refers to growth at 45 °C in Hv-YPC medium with 18% (w/v) salt water and was compared with high and low salt conditions, with 23 and 15% (w/v) salt water, respectively, as well as low and high temperature conditions at 30 and 53 °C, respectively. Total cell extracts were prepared by sonication, solubilization with sodium taurodeoxycholate (0.006% (w/v)) and ultracentrifugation of insoluble material. After digest, a spectral library was generated from pooled peptide aliquots from (i) standard conditions and (ii) all stress conditions. The pooled samples were fractionated into eight fractions by high‐pH/reversed‐phase separation and each fraction was analyzed using DDA on a TripleTOF 5600+ mass spectrometer after chromatographic separation on an Eksigent nanoLC 425. In addition, for quantitative analyses, unfractionated samples from each condition were analyzed using SWATH acquisition. Protein identification was originally performed using the Paragon search engine v5.0.0.0 implemented in ProteinPilot v5.0 build 4769 against the HaloLex H. volcanii DS2 proteome (version 19-NOV-2015; 10.5281/zenodo.3565619). For the reanalysis within the ArcPP, only the samples measured by DDA have been used, i.e., the pooled standards and stress conditions, which have been performed as biological duplicates.
Dataset PXD011218
This dataset has been previously published by Costa et al.. To address the impact of the intramembrane protease RhoII on H. volcanii physiology, the proteomes of MIG1 (ΔrhoII) and the parental H26 strains were compared by shotgun proteomics. Cultures were grown in MGM medium (18% salt water) at 42 °C and samples were taken at exponential and stationary growth phases. Membrane, cytoplasm, and supernatant protein samples were prepared and digested with trypsin. In addition, membrane proteins from exponential phase were fractionated by SDS-PAGE into four sections (PROTOMAP assay). A nanoACQUITY gradient UPLC pump system was used coupled to an LTQ Orbitrap Elite mass spectrometer. Protein identification was originally performed by SEQUEST algorithm embedded in Proteome Discoverer 1.4 searching against the HaloLex H. volcanii DS2 proteome (version 24-SEP-2013; 10.5281/zenodo.3565581) The experiment was performed with six biological replicates. This dataset includes files that are part of the dataset PXD009116. In order to avoid duplications, these files were not included here (but only in PXD009116) for the reanalysis.
Dataset PXD013046
In this dataset, previously published by Cerletti et al., the impact of the membrane-associated LonB protease on the proteome of H. volcanii was examined. To this end, the proteomes of the wild-type strain (H26) and the conditional mutant (HVLON3) with reduced LonB protease levels were compared. As a control, the proteome of strain HVABI, a deletion mutant of the downstream gene abi, was analyzed in parallel. These strains were grown in Hv-Min in the absence of Trp and samples were taken for four biological replicates at the exponential and stationary growth phases. Membrane and cytoplasm proteins were prepared, digested with trypsin and analyzed by LC-MS/MS. A nanoACQUITY gradient UPLC pump system was used coupled to an LTQ Orbitrap XL (cytoplasm samples) or a LTQ Orbitrap Elite (membrane samples) mass spectrometer. Protein identification was originally performed by SEQUEST and MS Amanda algorithms embedded in Proteome Discoverer 1.4 searching against the HaloLex H. volcanii DS2 proteome (version 24-SEP-2013; 10.5281/zenodo.3565581).
Dataset PXD014974
This dataset was generated as part of the presented work. With the aim to analyze the protein translation landscape, whole-cell extracts of H26 cells (OD600 of 0.6) were prepared by resuspending snap-frozen cell pellets in 500 µL extraction buffer (150 mM NaCl, 100 mM EDTA, 50 mM Tris pH 8.5, 1 mM MgCl2, 1% (w/v) SDS) and boiling them for 13 min at 95 °C. The cooled-down whole-cell extract was clarified by centrifugation (16,000 × g for 10 min), and the clarified supernatants were collected. Proteins were reduced by addition of β-mercaptoethanol (2% (v/v) final concentration) for 1 h in the dark. Proteins were precipitated by addition of acetone (80% (v/v) final concentration) for 1 h at −20 °C. After centrifugation (10 min 16,000 × g at 4 °C) the protein pellets were washed with acetone and centrifuged again. The obtained pellets were dissolved at room temperature in 1 ml solubilization buffer (25 mM Tris-HCl, pH 7.1, 6 M urea, 3 M thiourea, 50 mM KCl, 70 mM DTT) and stored overnight at 4 °C. Fifteen micrograms of resolubilized pellet were alkylated with 2-iodoacetamide (30 mM) for 30 min in the dark in a total volume of 110 µl complemented with 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate buffer. Three hundred microliters of urea buffer (8 M urea, 100 mM Tris pH 8.5) and 2 µl 1 M DTT were added and samples were incubated for 5 min at room temperature. Samples were further processed following the FASP protocol. Digestion was performed overnight at 37 °C using 1 µg trypsin and the digested peptides were eluted with 30 µl of 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate buffer containing 5% (v/v) acetonitrile. Eluates were acidified with 2 µl trifluoroacetic acid.
For analysis of the tryptic peptides, a Q Exactive HF mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific) coupled to an RSLC system (Ultimate 3000, Dionex, Sunnyvale, CA) was used, similar to ref. . Approximately 1 µg of sample was automatically loaded on the HPLC system, which was equipped with a nano trap column (300-μm inner diameter × 5 mm, packed with Acclaim PepMap 100 C18, 5 μm, 100 Å; LC Packings, Sunnyvale, CA). After 5 min, the peptides were eluted from the trap column and separated using reversed-phase chromatography (Acquity UPLC M-Class HSS T3 Column, 1.8 µm, 75 µm × 250 mm; Waters) using a gradient of 7‒27% (v/v) acetonitrile at a flow rate of 250 nl min−1 over a period of 90 min, followed by two short gradients of 27‒41% (v/v) acetonitrile (15 min) and 41‒85% (v/v) acetonitrile (5 min). After 5 min at 85% (v/v) acetonitrile, the gradient was set back to 3% (v/v) acetonitrile over a period of 2 min and allowed to equilibrate for 8 min. All acetonitrile solutions contained 0.1% (v/v) formic acid. Eluting peptides were analyzed in DDA mode which consisted of an MS1 spectrum at a resolution of 60,000 acquired in the Orbitrap ranging from 300 to 1500 m/z with AGC target set to 3 × 106. From this high-resolution MS scan, the ten most abundant peptide ions were selected for fragmentation if they exceeded an intensity of at least 2 × 104 counts and if they were at least doubly charged. MS/MS spectra were recorded in the Orbitrap at a resolution of 15,000 with a maximum injection time of 50 ms. The precursor ion isolation window was 1.6 m/z. Normalized collision energy was set to 28 and dynamic exclusion was set to 30 s.
The results were originally analyzed using MaxQuant (version 1.6.6.0) using standard parameters and the Uniprot H. volcanii DS2 proteome (UP000008243). Two biological replicates were performed.
General workflow for the reanalysis within the ArcPP
MS raw data files were downloaded from PRIDE or jPOST, converted into the unified HUPO Proteomics Standards Initiative standard file format mzML using the ThermoRawFileParser (for RAW files from Thermo Scientific) or msConvert (for SCIEX WIFF files, with --filter peakPicking true 1- and --filter zeroSamples removeExtra) included in ProteoWizard. For all subsequent file conversions, all protein database searches, as well as all statistical post-processing (if not indicated otherwise) that were performed within the ArcPP, the Python framework Ursgal (versions 0.6.5 and 0.6.6) has been used. The protein database was derived from the most recent Gold Standard Protein based annotation of the H. volcanii genome (version 06-JUN-2019, 10.5281/zenodo.3565631), consisting of 4186 proteins (including 79 spurious annotations and 33 duplicates, all of which were not counted for the final size of the proteome: 4074 proteins). The annotation of this genome (and others from haloarchaea) included extensive efforts to minimize the number of missing protein-coding gene annotations (including small protein-coding genes), e.g., applied algorithms did not include a size cutoff for genes, extensive manual curation was performed and regions not assigned as coding were systematically screened to detect and resolve missing gene calls. The H. volcanii database was supplemented with contaminants from the common Repository of Adventitious Proteins (https://www.thegpm.org/crap/). For all proteins, decoys were generated by peptide shuffling, dependent on the protease used for the digest. Protein database searches were then performed against the merged target-decoy database. Results from different search engines were unified within Ursgal, statistically post-processed using Percolator (version 3.4.0) and combined using the combined PEP approach. More details, including the initial parameter optimization as well as the combination of multiple datasets are described below.
Parameter optimization for protein database searches
For each dataset, protein database searches with X!Tandem have been performed using all combinations of four different precursor mass tolerances (5–20 ppm), five fragment mass tolerances (5, 7.5, 10, 20, 40 ppm for high-resolution MS; 0.1, 0.2, 0.4, and 0.8 Da for low resolution MS) and ten instrument offsets (−10 to 10 ppm). In order to speed up this process, only every second to fifth MS2 spectrum was used for the search. After statistical post-processing, parameter combinations with the highest number of total identified peptides were selected and the best-performing instrument offset was chosen for each MS raw file separately.
Protein database search for the reanalysis within the ArcPP
The following protein database search engines, implemented in Ursgal (version 0.6.5 to 0.6.6), were used for all datasets: X!Tandem (version Vengeance), MS-GF+ (version 2019.04.18), MSFragger (version 20190222). These search engines were chosen based on their speed and their availability in Ursgal. Besides the precursor and fragment ion mass tolerance and instrument offset determined by parameter optimization (see above), Ursgal’s default parameters have been used with the following modifications: oxidation of methionine and N-terminal protein acetylation, both as variable modifications, carbamidomethylation (or methylthio modification, or none, depending on the dataset) of cysteine as fixed modification. For PXD011012, iTRAQ4plex was included as fixed modification of the protein N-terminus and variable modification of lysine and tyrosine. For PXD006877, Label:13C(5) on proline, Label:13C(6)15N(2) on lysine, and Label:13C(6) on arginine were included as variable modifications. A maximum of two and three missed cleavages was allowed for datasets using Trypsin and GluC as protease, respectively. If samples were fractionated, results from one engine for all fractions were merged before statistical post-processing. Results from multiple search engines were afterward combined using the combined PEP approach and filtered by a combined PEP ≤ 1%. In case of discrepant identifications for the same spectrum by different database search engines, results were sanitized. To this end, the best PSM for each spectrum was chosen if there was no ambiguity or if the best PSM had a combined PEP that was an order of magnitude better than other identifications. Otherwise, all PSMs for that spectrum were rejected.
Comparison with original search results
Results from the original analysis were obtained from PRIDE, jPOST or provided by the individual research groups. This also applies to datasets that have not been published previously; they had been analyzed (as described above) independently of the ArcPP by the corresponding research group. In order to allow for a fair comparison, original search results were filtered by PEP ≤ 1% and sanitized as well. Furthermore, peptides smaller than six or larger than 50 amino acids were excluded. Finally, modifications other than the ones included in the reanalysis were removed as well.
Protein inference and calculation of peptide and protein FDR
The most recent annotation of the H. volcanii genome contained 19 sequences that had one or more identical duplicates. In total, 52 sequences were merged into 19 new protein names by randomly choosing one of the corresponding HVO IDs as representative and indicating the number of duplicates for each group. Besides this removal of identical sequences, identified peptide sequences that are part of multiple proteins were handled by a simplistic protein inference model, since their number is relatively small in H. volcanii. Non-proteotypic peptides were assigned to one protein if, out of the group of proteins that contain this peptide, only one protein was identified by other peptides in the same sample. Otherwise, the identification was kept as a protein group. Protein groups mapping on multiple proteins identified by other peptides were not taken into account for further analysis (total protein number, etc.). Protein groups not mapping onto any other protein were regarded as a single protein for further analyses.
Peptide and protein FDRs were calculated for each dataset separately as well as for the combination of all datasets. In both cases, the picked protein FDR approach was used similar to Wang et al.. On the peptide level, the best (lowest) Bayes PEP (from the combined PEP function in Ursgal) for each peptide sequence was chosen. After sorting, the list was traversed from top to bottom and the cumulative number of decoys was divided by the number of cumulative targets, yielding an empirical q-value. A second traversal from bottom to top, changing q-value from the first traversal to the minimum q-value observed so far, ensured monotonicity. For the estimation of protein FDRs, a score for each protein was calculated as the sum of −log10 transformed minimal Bayes PEPs from all identified sequences of that protein. Only peptide sequences with a peptide FDR ≤ 1% were taken into account. The protein scores were sorted, and q-values were calculated by traversing the list from top to bottom and bottom to top, as done for peptide q-values.
Peptides and proteins were regarded as confidently identified if their corresponding FDR was smaller than, or equal to, 1% and 0.5%, respectively. In addition, they were required to be supported by at least two PSMs. The effects of this filtering are described in Fig. S1 and the elimination of all decoy peptide hits with a peptide FDR ≤1% highlights the usefulness of this approach. We rejected the commonly used threshold to require two identified peptides because that interferes with identification of smaller proteins and has previously been shown to not be suitable for distinction between correct identifications and false positives.
It should be noted that calculations of peptide and protein FDRs have been performed for the combination of all datasets as well as for each individual dataset separately. The number of identifications reported for individual datasets, as well as for the comparison between datasets (Fig. 4) correspond to dataset-specific FDR calculations, while the overall identifications correspond to the FDR calculations for the combination of all datasets. This leads to a small number of proteins being identified only in the combined dataset but not in any individual dataset and vice versa.
MW, pI and hydrophobicity calculation
Molecular weight, pI, and hydrophobicity were computed by custom PERL scripts. For molecular weight, monoisotopic masses were used (as, e.g., listed in Expasy (https://web.expasy.org/findmod/findmod_masses.html#AA)). Computation of pI values is based on the pK values for amino acids at internal, N-terminal, and C-terminal positions. For hydrophobicity, the GRAVY index was computed, based on the hydropathy index of amino acids.
Prediction of signal peptides and transmembrane domains
The H. volcanii proteome was analyzed using TMHMM 2.0 for TM domains, SignalP 5.0 (organism group: archaea) for predictions of the Sec pathway, FlaFind for predictions of pilins, processed by SPIII (PibD), TatFind for Tat substrates, LipoP 1.0 for lipobox-containing proteins, and TatLipo for Tat substrates containing a lipobox, which involves cleavage by an as of yet unidentified bacterial SPII analog. Using these predictions, each protein was assigned to a single category based on positive predictions in a sequential decision tree as follows: TatLipo (Tat (lipobox)) → LipoP (Sec (lipobox)) → TatFind (Tat (SPI)) → FlaFind (Pil (SPIII)) → SignalP (Sec (SPI)) → TMHMM (TM) → Cyt. Proteins with at least two TM domains are considered integral membrane proteins, while proteins with one TM domain were categorized into TM N-term and TM C-term if their TM domain was within the first and last 50 amino acids, respectively. For some analyses (Fig. 3c, d), the categories Tat (lipobox), Sec (lipobox), Tat (SPI), Pil (SPIII), and Sec (SPI) were summarized as secreted proteins.
Semi-enzymatic protein database search
Protein database search for semi-enzymatic peptide has been performed using the same workflow as described above with the following exceptions. The Ursgal parameter semi_enzyme has been set to True. Furthermore, before statistically post-processing the results with Percolator, PSMs were grouped based on fully enzymatic and semi-enzymatic peptides and PEP calculations were performed for each group separately. This grouped validation approach results in more accurate FDRs on PSM level. Results were merged and peptide and protein FDRs were calculated as described above. Since the increased search space in a semi-enzymatic search can nevertheless lead to higher FDRs, the results from this search were not taken into account for the final number of identified proteins and peptides, but were only used for the comparison with signal peptide prediction engines. Furthermore, samples digested with GluC were excluded from the comparison, because a high number of semi-enzymatic peptides was identified, indicating a reduced site specificity of the enzyme. Results from immunoprecipitations and PXD000202 were excluded as well. In addition, for increased confidence, a minimum of five PSMs was required for the identification of semi-tryptic peptides. Finally, proteins with more semi- than fully-tryptic peptides were not taken into account, since increased proteolytic cleavage instead of a defined signal peptide cleavage was assumed.
Results were compared with predictions for Sec (SPI), Tat (SPI), and Sec (SPII) processing from SignalP 5.0, because it was shown to be the only prediction engine to accurately predict this variety of signal peptide CS in archaea. Since SignalP 5.0 has not been trained on Tat substrates containing a lipobox, results from TatLipo were used to override Tat (SPI) predictions from SignalP 5.0 with Tat (lipobox). If a semi-tryptic peptide starting at the predicted CS was identified, the predictions was regarded as correct. If a semi-tryptic peptide starts within a range of plus/minus three amino acids, the predicted CS was refined. If both cases were not fulfilled but a fully enzymatic peptide was identified starting at least three amino acids N-terminal of the predicted CS, the prediction was regarded as incorrect. Proteins, for which tryptic cleavage sites around the predicted CS prevented theoretical peptides with a length of 5–50 amino acids, or for which an N-terminal lipid modification was predicted, were counted but not classified as correct/incorrect, since an identification of semi-tryptic peptides for the predicted CS would not be possible through the employed methods.
Genomic islands with low protein identification rates
The analysis was performed separately for each replicon. Proteins were ordered serially along the replicon, based on the start of the coding region (which corresponds to the N-terminus for proteins encoded on the forward strand and to the C-terminus for proteins encoded on the reverse strand). For each gene, the corresponding protein identification rate was computed, considering 25 genes on each side, thus covering 51 genes. The circularity of all replicons was taken into account. Identification rates were in the range of 14 (27.5%) to 48 (94.1%). Closely spaced genes with a low identification rate (up to 20 identifications, 39.2%) are reported as low identification islands. Two islands with low identification rates correspond to prophages according to PhySpy.
Statistical analysis of arCOG classes
For three groups ((i) proteins present in all seven whole proteome datasets, (ii) proteins only identified in one whole proteome dataset, (iii) proteins not identified within the ArcPP), the distribution of arCOG classes was analyzed in comparison to their background distribution within the whole H. volcanii proteome. Significance was evaluated using Fisher’s exact test, considering for each group of proteins: (a) the number of identified proteins that belong to an arCOG category and (b) the number of identified proteins which do not belong to that arCOG category; equivalent numbers (within arCOG category; outside arCOG category) are computed for the background (whole theoretical proteome). A Bonferroni correction for multiple testing was applied on resulting p-values.
Urease activity assay
H. volcanii H26 was grown in GMM (Hv-Min medium with 20 mM glycerol as the carbon source and 10 mM NH4Cl as the nitrogen source) or CM (ATCC974 medium composed of 2.14 mM NaCl, 246 mM MgCl2, 28.7 mM K2SO4, 0.9 mM CaCl2, 0.5% tryptone (BactoTM) and 0.5% yeast extract (OxoidTM), adjusted to pH 6.8 with 1 M KOH). Cells were grown in 50 ml cultures (in 250 ml Erlenmeyer baffled flasks) at 42 °C with rotary shaking at 200 rpm.
Urease activity was monitored by detection of NH4+ production by the phenol-hypochlorite method as previously described with the following modifications. Cells were harvested in log phase (OD600 of 0.3–0.6) by centrifugation (F14-6x250 LE rotor, 2500 × g, 5 min, room temperature). Cell pellets (8 OD600 units total) were washed with 10 ml of buffer A (20 mM Tris-HCl buffer pH 7.2 supplemented with 2 M NaCl) by similar centrifugation. Cell pellets were resuspended to a final volume of 0.2–0.25 ml in buffer A and transferred to a 1.8 ml microfuge tube on ice. Samples were mixed with disruptor beads (0.2 g, 0.1 mm diameter, Chemglass) and vortexed (5 × 1 min with 2 min breaks on ice). Samples were centrifuged at 12,500 × g for 5 min at 4 °C and the cell lysate supernatant was transferred to a new 1.8-ml tube on ice. The protein concentration of the cell lysate was determined by Bradford Assay (BioRad) with NaOH included as 20 µl of 0.1 N NaOH stock per 200 µl assay to facilitate protein solubility. Bovine serum albumin (BSA) was used as the protein standard. Cell lysate (1.5–5 mg protein per ml) was used for the urease assay. Reactions (75 µl final volume), consisting of 65 µl cell lysate and 10 µl of 10% urea (w/v) in buffer A or 10 µl buffer A for the background control, were incubated at 25, 37, 42, 60, and 80 °C. Aliquots (10–15 µl) of the reaction were removed over time (0, 1 h, 2 h, and 3 h) and immediately assayed for NH4+ by the phenol-hypochlorite method using (NH4)2SO4 as the standard.
Reporting summary
Further information on research design is available in the Nature Research Reporting Summary linked to this article.