ABSTRACT:
As part of the chromosome-centric human proteome project (C-HPP) initiative, we report our progress on the annotation of chromosome 22. Chromosome 22, spanning 51 million base pairs, was the first chromosome to be sequenced. Gene dosage alterations on this chromosome have been shown to be associated with a number of congenital anomalies. In addition, several rare but aggressive tumors have been associated with this chromosome. A number of important gene families including immunoglobulin lambda locus, Crystallin beta family, and APOBEC gene family are located on this chromosome. On the basis of proteomic profiling of 30 histologically normal tissues and cells using high-resolution mass spectrometry, we show protein evidence of 367 genes on chromosome 22. Importantly, this includes 47 proteins, which are currently annotated as “missing” proteins. We also confirmed the translation start sites of 120 chromosome 22-encoded proteins. Employing a comprehensive proteogenomics analysis pipeline, we provide evidence of novel coding regions on this chromosome which include upstream ORFs and novel exons in addition to correcting existing gene structures. We describe tissue-wise expression of the proteins and the distribution of gene families on this chromosome. These data have been deposited to ProteomeXchange with the identifier PXD000561.
METHODS:
Materials and Methods
Sample Preparation and Fractionation
Histologically normal human organs, fetal tissues, and hematopoietic cells were procured after obtaining institutional ethical clearance. The tissues/cells were lysed in lysis buffer containing 4% SDS, 100 mM DTT, and 100 mM Tris pH 7.5, and were homogenized, sonicated, heated for 10–15 min at 75 °C, cooled, and centrifuged at 2000 rpm for 10 min. The protein concentration of the cleared lysate was estimated using BCA assay, and equal amounts from each of the donors was pooled for further fractionation.
Proteins from SDS lysates were separated on SDS-PAGE, and in-gel digestion was carried out as described earlier. Briefly, the protein bands were destained, reduced, alkylated, and subjected to in-gel digestion using trypsin. The peptides were extracted, vacuum-dried, and stored at −80 °C until further analysis.
Four hundred micrograms of proteins from each sample was subjected to in-solution trypsin digestion following reduction and alkylation with DTT and IAA, respectively. The peptide digests were then desalted using Sep-Pak C18 columns (Waters Corporation, Milford, MA) and lyophilized. The lyophilized samples were reconstituted in bRPLC solvent A (10 mM TEABC, pH 8.5) and loaded on an XBridge C18, 5 μm 250 × 4.6 mm column (Waters, Milford, MA). The peptide digest was resolved using a gradient of 0 to 100% solvent B (10 mM TEABC in acetonitrile, pH 8.5) in 50 min. The total fractionation time was 60 min. Ninety-six fractions were collected which were then concatenated to 24 fractions, vacuum-dried, and stored at −80 until further LC-MS/MS analysis.
LC-MS/MS Analysis
Peptide samples from in-gel digestion and bRPLC fractionation were analyzed on LTQ-Orbitrap Velos and LTQ-Orbitrap Elite mass spectrometers (Thermo Electron, Bremen, Germany) interfaced with an Easy-nLC II nanoflow liquid chromatography system (Thermo Scientific, Odense, Southern Denmark). The peptide digests were reconstituted in 0.1% formic acid and loaded onto a trap column (75 μm × 2 cm) packed in-house with Magic C18 AQ (Michrom Bioresources, Inc., Auburn, CA) at a flow rate of 5 μL/min with solvent A. Peptides were resolved on an analytical column (75 μm × 10 cm) at a flow rate of 350 nL/min using a linear gradient of 7–30% solvent B (0.1% formic acid in 95% acetonitrile) over 60 min. Data-dependent acquisition with full scans in the 350–1800 m/z range were carried out using an Orbitrap mass analyzer at a mass resolution of 60 000 in Velos and 120 000 in Elite at 400 m/z, respectively. Twenty of the most intense precursor ions from a survey scan were selected for MS/MS and were fragmented using higher-energy collision dissociation (HCD) with 35% normalized collision energy and detected at a mass resolution of 15 000 and 30 000 at 400 m/z in Velos and Elite, respectively. Dynamic exclusion was set for 30 s with a 10 ppm mass window.
Proteomic Data Analysis
Mass spectrometry data obtained from all LC-MS/MS analysis were searched against Human RefSeq50 database (containing 33 833 entries along with common contaminants) using Sequest and Mascot (version 2.2) search algorithms through Proteome Discoverer 1.3 (Thermo Scientific, Bremen, Germany). Enzyme specificity was set as trypsin with maximum of two missed cleavages allowed. The minimum peptide length was specified as six amino acids. Carbamidomethylation of cysteine was specified as fixed modification and oxidation of methionine, acetylation of protein N-termini and cyclization of N-terminal glutamine were included as variable modifications. The peptide and fragment mass tolerance was set to 10 ppm and 0.05 Da for fragment ions. The data were also searched against a decoy database, and the results were used to estimate q values using the Percolator algorithm within Proteome Discoverer. Peptides were considered identified at a q value <0.01 and used for further analysis.
Identification of Novel Peptides Using Alternative Databases Searches
To enable identification of novel peptides and correction of existing gene annotations in the human genome, five alternative databases were used. These databases were generated using in-house python scripts for proteogenomic analysis. The databases used were (1) six-frame translated genome database, (2) three-frame translated RefSeq mRNA sequences from NCBI, (3) three-frame translated pseudogene database with sequences derived from sequences from NCBI and Gerstein’s pseudogenes, (4) three-frame translated non coding RNAs from NONCODE, and (5) N-terminal UTR database of RefSeq mRNA sequences from NCBI. A decoy database was created for each database by reversing the sequences from a target database. Peptide identification was carried out using X!Tandem. The following parameters were common to all searches: (1) precursor mass error set at 10 ppm, (2) fragment mass error set at 0.05 Da, (3) carbamidomethylation of cysteine defined as a fixed modification, (4) oxidation of methionine defined as a variable modification, and (5) only tryptic peptides with up to two missed cleavages were considered. The sequences of common contaminants including trypsin used as protease were appended to the database. Unmatched MS/MS spectra peaklist files were extracted from the protein database search result and searched against these databases using the X!Tandem search engine installed locally.
All the databases were created in-house using python scripts. For the six-frame translated genome database, the human reference genome assembly hg19 was downloaded from NCBI and translated in six reading frames, and peptide sequences greater than six amino acids were retained in the database. The mRNA sequences were downloaded from NCBI RefSeq (RefSeq version 56 containing 33 580 sequences) and translated in three reading frames. Custom pseudogene database from NCBI (11 160 sequences) and Gerstein’s pseudogene database (16 881 sequences from , version 68) as well as noncoding RNA sequences from NONCODE (91 687 sequences, version 3) were translated in three reading frames.
Peptide sequences identified from each of the alternate database searches were filtered, and only those passing 1% FDR score threshold at the peptide level were considered. Unique lists of genome search specific peptides (GSSPs), pseudogene specific peptides, and transcriptome search specific peptides were generated by comparing the peptides with the protein database. Peptides mapping to multiple regions in the genome and with isoleucine/leucine ambiguity were not considered for further analysis. The final list of the peptides was then manually validated to verify the confidence of spectral assignment.
Gene Ontology Analysis
Molecular functions and primary localization information for all the proteins were obtained from Human Protein Reference Database, HPRD (), containing manually curated protein annotations along with protein–protein interactions related to human proteins.
Quantitation Based on Spectral Counts
Normalized spectral counts were calculated by summing spectral counts from all the peptides mapping to a given gene per experiment (i.e., SDS-PAGE or bRPLC). Total acquired tandem MS were then used to normalize between experiments, and the resulting spectral counts per gene were averaged across multiple experiments (e.g., bRPLC and SDS-PAGE fractionation) per sample (e.g., esophagus). Final numbers per gene were used for plotting the heat map.