ABSTRACT:
Metastatic melanoma is one of the most common deadly cancers, and robust biomarkers are still needed, e.g. to predict survival and treatment efficiency. Here, protein expression analysis of one hundred eleven melanoma lymph node metastases using high resolution mass spectrometry is coupled with in-depth histopathology analysis, clinical data and genomics profiles. This broad view of protein expression allowed to identify novel candidate protein markers that improved prediction of survival in melanoma patients. Some of the prognostic proteins have not been reported in the context of melanoma before, and few of them exhibit unexpected relationship to survival, which likely reflects the limitations of current knowledge on melanoma and shows the potential of proteomics in clinical cancer research.
METHODS:
Materials and Methods
Reagents and solutions
All chemical reagents were purchased from Sigma Aldrich (St. Louis, MO) unless otherwise specified. Water and organic solvents were of LC–MS quality and supplied by Merck (Darmstadt, Germany). All solutions were degassed by sonication before use.
Tissue samples and sample preparation
111 lymph node metastasis samples from patients with malignant melanoma (Stage 3 and 4), archived in the local malignant melanoma biobank were obtained from Skåne University Hospital, Sweden. Each sample was marked as ‘MM’ followed by identification number. Ethical approval was granted by Central Ethical Review board at Lund University; approval number: DNR 191/2007, 101/2013. All patients within the study provided a written informed consent. All experiments were performed in accordance with relevant guidelines and regulations. The malignant melanoma biobank “Tissue bank for research on tumour diseases” (BD20)” is located at Barngatan 2B, 221 85 Lund, Sweden. The samples were originally snap frozen immediately after surgery. Frozen tissue samples from BD20 were sectioned on a cryostat into 10 µm thick slices (approximately 6 × 6 mm), placed into a 96 well plate and stored at −80 °C until further use. From each tissue, 15 to 20 slices were withdrawn for sample preparation. Patient characteristics are summarised in Table 1. Clinical and histopathological parameters were retrieved from patients’ clinical records, pathology reports and the Swedish National Population Registry. Survival was defined as time (days) from lymph node excision to patient’s death or censoring date.
Histopathological evaluation
Frozen sections of all lymph node metastases stained with HE were evaluated by a certified pathologist. Serial sections were taken of each tumor, and at least seven slices per sample were examined. The tissue was assessed for its content regarding tumor, normal lymph node, necrosis, and background of any further component (e.g. fat or connective tissue). As previously described, the tumor was then evaluated for its histological characteristics containing epithelioid or spindle or mixed architecture, the tumor cell average size (scale 1–3) and pigmentation (scale 1–3). The tumor infiltrating lymphocytes were also assessed for their distribution (scale 1–3) and intensity (scale 1–3) in the tumor - only those which directly infiltrated the metastases were taken into account. The sum of distribution and density was then summarized in a 0–6 score considered as immunoscore.
cDNA synthesis and BRAF DNA sequencing
Two cell lines, SK-MEL-2 and SK-MEL-28 (ATCC®, Manassas, USA), were used as reference BRAF wild type and V600E respectively. Total RNA was extracted from the cell lines or frozen tissues from the malignant melanoma patients using RNeasy mini kit (Qiagen, Venlo, The Netherlands). The extracted RNA were reverse transcribed to cDNA by using Superscript III First Strand Synthesis System kit (ThermoFisher, Waltham, MA) according to the manufacturer’s instructions. The cDNA was amplified with a set of primers that produced a PCR product including BRAF mutation at the position V600; 5′-(AGCCTTACAGAAATCTCCAGGACC)-3′ and 5′-(TTGGGGAAAGAGTGGTCTCTCATC)-3′. The PCR conditions were 95 °C for 5 min, followed by 36 cycles of 95 °C for 30 sec, 62 °C for 30 sec, and 72 °C for 2.5 min with a final incubation of 72 °C for 7 min. A portion of the PCR product was amplified a second time using the same condition as the first PCR, and the amplification was 24 cycles, instead of 36 cycles. The PCR products were run on a 1% agarose gel, and DNA was extracted from the gel using a QIAquick Gel Extraction kit (Qiagen) according to the manufacturer’s instruction. The purified PCR products were sequenced using a primer 5′-(TTCCACAAAGCCACAACTGG)-3′ by Eurofins Genomics (Ebersberg, Germany).
Mutation data
Mutational information for selected 1697 cancer-associated genes were obtained by targeted deep sequencing of the patient tumor samples with matched blood, as described previously. Visualization of mutational information was obtained using the oncoprinter function from R package ComplexHeatmap.
Tissue lysis and protein extraction
Frozen tissue slices were lysed with 6 M urea in 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate buffer (AmBic) for 30 min on ice bath. Samples were additionally vortexed for 10 min in order to promote protein extraction. After incubation with urea the lysate was sonicated for 5 min and centrifuged at 10 000 g at room temperature for 10 minutes. Supernatant was transferred into a new tube and the pellet was discarded. Protein concentration was measured using a bicinchoninic acid protein assay according to the manufacturer’s instructions (Micro BCA kit, Pierce/Thermo Scientific, Rockford, IL). The samples were spiked with 0.1 mg of internal standard – chicken lysozyme (CL, Swiss-Prot accession no. P00698).
In-solution digestion with trypsin
A fixed amount (80 μg) of protein were reduced with 10 mM DTT for 1 h at 37 °C, then it was alkylated using 50 mM iodoacetamide for 30 min and kept in dark at room temperature. Urea was removed from the samples using Amicon Ultra centrifugal filters (0.5 mL, 10 kDa, Millipore, Ireland) according to the manufacturer’s instructions. Briefly, the protein samples were mixed with 200 μL of 50 mM AmBic, then centrifuged at 14 000 g at room temperature for 20 minutes and the eluates were discarded. These steps were repeated two more times. The samples were transferred to an Eppendorf tube and digested with sequencing grade trypsin (Promega, Madison, WI) in a ratio 1:100 w/w (trypsin:protein) overnight at 37 °C. The digestion was stopped by adding formic acid till 1% as final concentration. The samples were dried using a centrifugal evaporator and resuspended in 80 μL of 0.1% formic acid and centrifuged for 5 min at 10 000 g. The supernatants were stored at −80 °C until further use. Prior to injection onto LC–MS/MS, 20 µL of samples were mixed with 20 µL of peptide retention time calibration mixture (PRTC, Pierce/Thermo Scientific, Rockford, IL, 20 fmoL/mL).
LC-MS/MS Analysis of the tumor lysate digests
Online chromatography was performed with a Thermo Easy nLC 1000 system (Thermo Fisher Scientific) coupled online to a Q-Exactive Plus mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific, San José, CA). The peptides were first loaded onto a trap column (Acclaim1 PepMap 100 pre-column, 75 µm, 2 cm, C18, 3 mm, 100 Å, Thermo Scientific, San José, CA) and then separated on an analytical column (EASY-Spray column, 25 cm, 75 µm ID, PepMap RSLC C18, 2 mm, 100 Å, Thermo Scientific, San José, CA). Flow rate of 300 nL/min and a column temperature of 35 °C were utilised. A gradient was applied, using solvent A (0.1% formic acid) and solvent B (0.1% formic acid in acetonitrile). The gradient went from 5% to 40% B in the first 120 min, followed by raise to 90% B in the next 5 min, which was maintained for 10 min. To avoid carryover, each sample analysis was followed by a blank injection (water containing 0.1% formic acid). Mass spectrometry data were measured using a data-dependent top-15 method. Full MS scans were acquired over m/z 350–1800 range with resolution of 70 000 (at m/z 200), target AGC value of 1∙106 and maximum injection time of 100 ms. Selected ions were fragmented in the HCD collision cell with normalised collision energy of 30%, and tandem mass spectra were acquired in the Orbitrap mass analyzer with resolution of 17 500 (at m/z 200), target AGC value of 1∙106 and maximum injection time of 120 ms. The ion selection threshold was set to 4.2∙104 and dynamic exclusion was 20 s.
Proteomics data analysis
The LC-MS/MS raw files were analyzed with Proteome Discoverer 2.1 (Thermo Scientific, San José, CA) for protein identification and quantitation. The files were searched against the UniProtKB human database (released May 2016) excluding isoforms. The search was performed with the following parameters: carbamidomethylation as static modification, oxidation of methionine as dynamic modification, 20 ppm precursor tolerance and 0.02 Da fragment tolerance. Up to two missed cleavages for tryptic peptides was allowed. Filters: high confidence at peptides and protein levels were applied (FDR 0.01). Protein intensities were log2 transformed, followed by sample median subtraction using R (version 2.41–3).
Multivariate survival analysis
We have used unsupervised and supervised approaches to linking proteomic data to survival. The unsupervised method was performed using consensus clustering in R with ConsensusClusterPlus library (version 1.42.0). The supervised approach is based on PLS-Cox regression similar to that of Nguyen and Rocke. The PLS-step of the model is used to reduce the high dimensionality of the proteomic data, while Cox regression was used on the first PLS component. We use a similar approach as Bair et al. to assess the performance of this model. For cross-validation, the dataset is split into two subsets; the first is used to fit the model, the second to evaluate its performance. This process is repeated 100 times and the results of all iterations are averaged. Simultaneously, we extract the most important features, i.e. proteins, using rank products of the PLS loadings. Correction for multiple testing with Benjamini-Hochberg approach results in 9 proteins which are significantly positively correlated to long survival and 18 which are significantly negatively correlated at adjusted significance level of 0.05. We performed this analysis both for the full sample set (N = 111) as well as for a subset (N = 94) wherein all samples contain at least 15% tumor. The supervised survival analysis was performed using peptide data as well, but the identified sample clusters showed less significant relationships to survival.
For the Kaplan-Meier survival analysis, the survdiff function in R (version 2.41–3) was used, which implements the log-rank test.
Differentially expressed genes and proteins for the survival-related patient clusters were elucidated using the SAM method, applying multiple testing correction as described. Gene expression data for the patient samples analysed in the current study were obtained in a previous study using the same sample set but different tissue sections.
By using the pheatmap library in R, two clustered heatmaps were built for the differentially expressed proteins and genes obtained from SAM analysis (FDR < 0.0005). Melanoma type, disease stage, BRAF status, TCGA classification and four-category classification of Jönsson et al. were used as annotation terms. Comparison of clinical and histopathological parameters between the sample clusters was performed by chi-squared test (categorical variables) and by Kruskal-Wallis test (quantitative nonparametric variables). Differences were considered significant when p-value < 0.05 (without multiple testing adjustment).
The transcriptomic dataset of melanoma lymph node metastases from the TCGA database was used for validation of the candidate proteomic survival biomarkers found in our study. The SurvExpress tool was applied to assess if query transcripts were promising predictors of survival.
Protein set functional analysis
Functional analysis of the protein sets identified with PLS-Cox regression and correlation analysis with tumor content was conducted using IPA, Ingenuity Pathway Analysis (Qiagen, Redwood City, CA, USA), in particular by generating networks of protein-protein functional relationships. As background, the set of proteins detected in >70% of the samples was used.
Functional analysis of lists of proteins mentioned above was also performed using the Panther server. Overrepresentation of specific functional annotations within the protein lists was determined by Fisher’s exact test, the background protein set consisted of all proteins detected. Gene Ontology annotations, SwissProt keywords, and Reactome and KEGG pathways were used as annotation terms for the enrichment analysis.