ABSTRACT:
Aging promotes lung function decline and susceptibility to chronic lung diseases, which are the third leading cause of death worldwide. Here, we use single cell transcriptomics and mass spectrometry-based proteomics to quantify changes in cellular activity states across 30 cell types and chart the lung proteome of young and old mice. We show that aging leads to increased transcriptional noise, indicating deregulated epigenetic control. We observe cell type-specific effects of aging, uncovering increased cholesterol biosynthesis in type-2 pneumocytes and lipofibroblasts and altered relative frequency of airway epithelial cells as hallmarks of lung aging. Proteomic profiling reveals extracellular matrix remodeling in old mice, including increased collagen IV and XVI and decreased Fraser syndrome complex proteins and collagen XIV. Computational integration of the aging proteome with the single cell transcriptomes predicts the cellular source of regulated proteins and creates an unbiased reference map of the aging lung.
Aging impacts lung functionality and makes it more susceptible to chronic diseases. Combining proteomics and single cell transcriptomics, the authors chart molecular and cellular changes in the aging mouse lung, discover aging hallmarks, and predict the cellular sources of regulated proteins.
METHODS:
Methods
Ethics statement
Pathogen-free C57BL/6 mice were obtained from Charles River and housed in rooms maintained at constant temperature and humidity with a 12 h light cycle. Animals were allowed food and water ad libitum. For this study, organs were obtained from mice that had to be killed because of excessive breeding. Animal handling was performed according to strict governmental and international guidelines and ethical oversight by the local government for the administrative region of Upper Bavaria, Germany.
Generation of single-cell suspensions from whole mouse lung
After killing mice, lung tissue was perfused with sterile saline from the right to the left ventricle of the heart and subsequently inflated via a catheter in the trachea by an enzyme mix containing dispase (50 caseinolytic units/ml), collagenase (2 mg/ml), elastase (1 mg/ml), and DNase (30 μg/ml). After tying off the trachea, the lung was removed and immediately minced to small pieces (approximately 1 mm2). The tissue was transferred into 4 ml enzyme mix for enzymatic digestion for 30 min at 37 °C. Enzyme activity was inhibited by adding 5 ml of phosphate-buffered saline (PBS) supplemented with 10% fetal calf serum (FCS). Dissociated cells in suspension were passed through a 70 μm strainer and centrifuged at 500 × g for 5 min at 4 °C. Red blood cell lysis (Thermo Fisher 00-4333-57) was done for 2 min and stopped with 10% FCS in PBS. After another centrifugation for 5 min at 500 × g (4 °C) the cells were counted using a Neubauer chamber and critically assessed for single-cell separation and viability. A total of 250,000 cells were aliquoted in 2.5 ml of PBS supplemented with 0.04% of bovine serum albumin and loaded for DropSeq at a final concentration of 100 cells/μl.
Single-cell RNA sequencing
Dropseq experiments were performed according to the original Dropseq protocol. Using a microfluidic polydimethylsiloxane device (Nanoshift), single cells (100/µl) from the lung cell suspension were co-encapsulated in droplets with barcoded beads (120/µl, purchased from ChemGenes Corporation, Wilmington, MA) at rates of 4000 µl/h. Droplet emulsions were collected for 15 min/each prior to droplet breakage by perfluorooctanol (Sigma-Aldrich). After breakage, beads were harvested and the hybridized mRNA transcripts reverse transcribed (Maxima RT, Thermo Fisher). Unused primers were removed by the addition of exonuclease I (New England Biolabs), following which beads were washed, counted, and aliquoted for pre-amplification (2000 beads/reaction, equals ~100 cells/reaction) with 12 PCR cycles (Smart PCR primer: AAGCAGTGGTATCAACGCAGAGT (100 µM), 2× KAPA HiFi Hotstart Readymix (KAPA Biosystems), cycle conditions: 3 min 95 °C, 4 cycles of 20 s 98 °C, 45 s 65 °C, 3 min 72 °C, followed by 8 cycles of 20 s 98 °C, 20 s 67 °C, 3 min 72 °C, then 5 min at 72 °C). PCR products of each sample were pooled and purified twice by 0.6× clean-up beads (CleanNA), following the manufacturer’s instructions. Prior to tagmentation, complementary DNA (cDNA) samples were loaded on a DNA High Sensitivity Chip on the 2100 Bioanalyzer (Agilent) to ensure transcript integrity, purity, and amount. For each sample, 1 ng of pre-amplified cDNA from an estimated 1000 cells was tagmented by Nextera XT (Illumina) with a custom P5 primer (Integrated DNA Technologies). Single-cell libraries were sequenced in a 100 bp paired-end run on the Illumina HiSeq4000 using 0.2 nM denatured sample and 5% PhiX spike-in. For priming of read 1, 0.5 µM Read1CustSeqB (primer sequence: GCCTGTCCGCGGAAGCAGTGGTATCAACGCAGAGTAC) was used.
Bioinformatic processing of scRNA-seq reads
The Dropseq core computational pipeline15 was used for processing next-generation sequencing reads of the scRNA-seq data. STAR (version 2.5.2a) was used for mapping. Reads were aligned to the mm10 genome reference (provided by the Dropseq group via the Gene Expression Omnibus (GEO) accession code GSE63269). For cell filtering, we considered all barcodes with more than 200 genes detected within the top 1200 barcodes by total UMI counts. Samples muc3838, muc3839, muc3840, and muc3841 were sequenced at lower depth in which case we considered the top 800, 500, 500, and 500 barcodes by total UMI counts corresponding to the expected number of cells, respectively.
Single-cell data analysis
After constructing the single-cell gene expression count matrix, we used the R package Seurat and custom scripts for analysis.
For unsupervised clustering and visualization, we first defined highly variable genes within each mouse sample separately following the Seurat standard approach. Next, genes appearing in >4 mouse samples in the set of highly variable genes were defined as a set of consensus highly variable genes. To minimize the effect of cell cycle on clustering we removed cell-cycle genes from the set of consensus highly variable genes. All 14,813 cells passing quality control were merged into one count matrix and normalized and scaled using Seurat’s NormalizeData() and ScaleData() functions, in which we regressed out the total UMI count. The reduced set of consensus highly variable genes was used as the feature set for independent component analysis using Seurat’s RunICA() function. The first 30 independent components were used for tSNE visualization and Louvain clustering using the Seurat functions RunTSNE() and FindClusters(), respectively.
To quantitatively assess the clustering overlap across mouse samples, the Silhouette coefficient was calculated. The Silhouette coefficient was calculated between the Euclidean distance of the 50 independent components and the mouse sample indicator. The Silhouette coefficient ranges from −1 to 1 and values close to zero indicate random clustering with regard to the specified indicator.
The Seurat FindAllMarkers() function was used to identify cluster-specific marker genes. Based on manual annotation and with guidance of the enrichment analysis (see below), the 36 clusters were assigned to 30 cell-type identities. Using the annotation of cell-type identities, the FindAllMarkers() function was called to identify the final set of cell-type markers used throughout this analysis.
An important technical detail needed our attention and is briefly described here. As infrequently discussed in the community but not yet addressed, we also observed ‘ambient mRNA' effects, which we believe are the consequence of free mRNA released from dying cells hybridizing with beads in droplets during the microfluidic capture of single cells in the Dropseq workflow. The ambient mRNAs are typically derived from highly abundant transcripts and this artifact is inherent to all droplet-based methods (including the commercially available 10× platform). Here, it can be exemplified by the Scgb1a1 gene in Fig. 1c that is known to be highly specific for club and goblet cells but was nevertheless detected in almost 100% of the cells in our data. However, the UMI count levels were much higher in club and goblet cells (representing the real source of expression), indicating that the mRNA counts observed in all other clusters were of ambient mRNA background. To independently confirm this we therefore determined all genes that showed ambient mRNA background by analyzing the identity of genes on beads at the tail-end of the total UMI count distribution (on average 10 UMIs per barcode), representing empty beads that were never in contact with a real cell but nevertheless contain information from free-floating ambient mRNA. We identified 153 genes (Supplementary Data 7) with an ‘ambient mRNA' effect and accounted for this effect in the cell type-resolved differential expression analysis (see below for details).
To aid the assignment of cell type to clusters derived from unsupervised clustering, we performed cell-type enrichment analysis. Cell-type gene signatures obtained from bulk-level gene expression were downloaded from the ImmGen and xCell resources. Each gene signature obtained from our clustering was statistically evaluated for overlap with gene signatures contained in these two resources. Mouse gene symbols were capitalized to map to human gene symbols. Overlap between gene signatures was evaluated using Fisher’s exact test.
Cell-type marker signatures in our data (Supplementary Data 1) were compared to cell-type marker signatures in the MCA. MatchSCore was used to quantify overlap between cell-type marker signatures derived from our study and the MCA. Marker genes with adjusted p value < 0.1 and average log fold change >1 were considered.
Transcriptional noise in the gene expression profiles was quantified following previous work. For each cell type with at least 10 old and young cells, we quantified transcriptional noise in the following manner. To account for differences in total UMI counts, all cells were downsampled so that all cells had equal number of total UMI counts. To account for differences in cell-type frequency, cell numbers were down-sampled so that equal numbers of young and old cells were used. Next, genes were divided into 10 equally sized bins based on mean expression and the top and bottom bins excluded. Within each bin, the 10% of genes with the lowest coefficient of variation were selected. Subsampled raw count data were reduced to this set of genes and square-root transformed. Next, the euclidean distance between each cell and the corresponding cell-type mean within each age group was calculated. This euclidean distance was used as one measure of transcriptional noise for each cell. Additionally, we average the euclidean distances for each mouse and calculated the transcriptional noise ratio between young and old mice. Alternatively, we calculated Spearman's correlation coefficients on the down-sampled expression matrices across all genes between all pairwise cell comparisons within each cell type and age group. To be consistent with the sign of the metric we used 1–Spearman correlation coefficient as the second measure of transcriptional noise. To statistically assess the association between transcriptional noise and age within each cell type, Wilcoxon’s rank sum test was used. The p values were subsequently corrected for multiple testing using the Bonferroni–Hochberg method as implemented in the R function p.adjust().
Cell-type frequencies were calculated based on the counts of cells annotated to each cell type for each mouse. Counts were transformed to proportions using the DR_data() function of the DirichletReg R package which causes the values to shrink away from extreme values of 0 and 1. Next, the mouse-wise euclidean distances were calculated based on these proportions using the dist() R function followed by multidimensional scaling using the isoMDS() R function. To statistically assess the association between age and the first coordinate derived from the multidimensional scaling, Wilcoxon test was applied. Relative changes in cell-type frequencies were calculated by subtracting the median cell-type proportion of the young mice from the cell-type proportions of the old mice.
Cell type-resolved differential expression analysis was performed using the Seurat differential gene expression testing framework. Within each cell type, cells were grouped by age and differential testing performed using the Seurat FindMarkers() function. By inspecting barcodes with a very low number of UMI counts, we identified 153 potential ambient mRNAs. However, these mRNAs could represent true housekeeper genes which are constitutively expressed in all cells. Therefore, we removed 41 mRNAs which showed no cell type-specific expression effect (log2 fold change < 1) in any of the cell types in the cell-type marker discovery analysis from this list. Next, to avoid differential testing of a gene in a cell type where expression levels are driven by the ambient effect, cell type-resolved differential expression testing of the remaining 112 ambient mRNAs was limited to cell types in which the ambient mRNA showed moderate cell type-specific expression (adjusted p value < 0.25).
The one-dimensional annotation enrichment analysis was used for cell type-resolved pathway analysis. We used the freely available software package Perseus, as previously described. To predict the activity of upstream transcriptional regulators and growth factors based on the observed gene expression changes, we used the Ingenuity® Pathway Analysis platform (IPA®, QIAGEN Redwood City, www.qiagen.com/ingenuity). The analysis uses a suite of algorithms and tools embedded in IPA for inferring and scoring regulator networks upstream of gene expression data based on a large-scale causal network derived from the Ingenuity Knowledge Base. The analytics tool Upstream Regulator Analysis was used to compare the known effect (transcriptional activation or repression) of a transcriptional regulator on its target genes to the observed changes to assign an activation Z-score. Since it is a priori unknown which causal edges in the master network are applicable to the experimental context, the Upstream Regulator Analysis tool uses a statistical approach to determine and score those regulators whose network connections to dataset genes as well as associated regulation directions are unlikely to occur in a random model. In particular, the tool defines an overlap p value measuring enrichment of network-regulated genes in the dataset, as well as an activation Z-score which can be used to find likely regulating molecules based on a statistically significant pattern match of up- and down-regulation, and also to predict the activation state (either activated or inhibited) of a putative regulator. In our analysis we considered genes with an overlap p value of >7 (log10) that had an activation Z-score > 2 as activated and those with an activation Z-score < −2 as inhibited.
Proteomics and multi-omics data integration
For proteome analysis ~100 mg of fresh frozen total tissue (wet weight) of mouse lungs was homogenized in 500 µl PBS (with protease inhibitor cocktail) using an Ultra-turrax homogenizer. After centrifugation the soluble proteins were collected and proteins were extracted from the insoluble pellet in three steps using buffers with increasing stringency using the QDSP protocol. Lungs were perfused with PBS through the heart to remove blood. Then, ~100 mg of total lung tissue (wet weight) was homogenized in 500 µl PBS (with protease inhibitor cocktail and EDTA) using an Ultra-turrax homogenizer. After centrifugation the soluble proteins were collected and proteins were extracted from the insoluble pellet in three steps using buffers with increasing stringency (buffer 1: 150 mM NaCl, 50 mM Tris-HCl (pH 7.5), 5% Glycerol, 1% IGPAL-CA-630 (Sigma, #I8896), 1 mM MgCl2, 1× Protease inhibitors (+EDTA), 1% Benzonase (Merck, #70746-3), 1× Phosphatase inhibitors (Roche, #04906837001); buffer 2: 50 mM Tris-HCl (pH 7.5), 5% Glycerol, 150 mM NaCl+fresh protease inhibitor tablet (+EDTA), 1.0% IGEPAL® CA-630, 0.5% sodium deoxycholate, 0.1% SDS, 1% Benzonase (Merck, #70746-3); buffer 3: 50 mM Tris-HCl (pH 7.5), 5% Glycerol, 500 mM NaCl, protease inhibitor tablet (+EDTA), 1.0% IGEPAL® CA-630, 2% sodium deoxycholate, 1% SDS, 1% Benzonase (Merck, #70746-3)). Insoluble pellets were resuspended in detergent containing buffers and incubated for 20 min on ice (except for buffer 3, which was used at room temperature), followed by separation of soluble and insoluble material using centrifugation for 20 min at 16,000 × g. The PBS from the tissue homogenate and the NP40 soluble fraction (buffer 1) was pooled which, together with the two fractions derived from ionic detergent extraction (buffer 2 and 3), resulted in a total of three soluble fractions and one insoluble pellet that were subjected to liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS) analysis. Soluble proteins were precipitated with 80% acetone and subjected to in solution digestion using a modified published protocol. In brief, protein reduction (10 mM TCEP) and alkylation (50 mM CAA) were performed at once in 6 M guadinium hydrochloride (100 mM Tris-HCl pH 8) at 99 °C for 15 min. Subsequent protein digestion was done in two steps. The first digestion was done at 37 °C for 2 h with LysC (1:50 enzyme to protein ratio) in 10 mM Tris-Hcl (pH 8.5) containing 2 M guadinium hydrochloride (Gdm), 2.7 M Urea, and 3% acetonitrile. The second digestion step was done using fresh LysC (1:50 enzyme to protein ratio) and trypsin (1:20 enzyme to protein ratio) in 600 mM Gdm, 800 mM Urea, and 3% acetonitrile at 37 °C overnight. For the insoluble protein pellet, which is strongly enriched for insoluble ECM proteins, we optimized the in-solution digestion protocol with additional steps involving extensive mechanical disintegration and ultra-sonication aided digestion. The insoluble material was cooked, reduced, and alkylated in 6 M Gdm for 15 min and then subjected to 200 strokes in a micro-dounce device, which reduced the particle size of the insoluble protein meshwork. We then proceeded with the two-step digestion protocol described above, which was additionally aided by 15 min ultrasonication (Bioruptor, Diagenode) in the presence of the enzymes in both digestion steps. Peptides were purified using stage-tips containing a poly-styrene-divinylbenzene copolymer modified with sulfonic acid groups (SDB-RPS) material (3 M, St. Paul, MN 55144-1000, USA) as previously described.
Mass spectrometry data were acquired on a Quadrupole/Orbitrap type Mass Spectrometer (Q-Exactive, Thermo Scientific) as previously described. Approximately 2 μg of peptides were separated in a 4 h gradient on a 50 cm long (75 μm inner diameter) column packed in-house with ReproSil-Pur C18-AQ 1.9 μm resin (Dr. Maisch GmbH). Reverse-phase chromatography was performed with an EASY-nLC 1000 ultra-high pressure system (Thermo Fisher Scientific), which was coupled to a Q-Exactive Mass Spectrometer (Thermo Scientific). Peptides were loaded with buffer A (0.1% (v/v) formic acid) and eluted with a nonlinear 240 min gradient of 5–60% buffer B (0.1% (v/v) formic acid, 80% (v/v) acetonitrile) at a flow rate of 250 nl/min. After each gradient, the column was washed with 95% buffer B and re-equilibrated with buffer A. Column temperature was kept at 50 °C by an in-house designed oven with a Peltier element and operational parameters were monitored in real time by the SprayQc software. MS data were acquired with a shotgun proteomics method, where in each cycle a full scan, providing an overview of the full complement of isotope patterns visible at that particular time point, is followed by up to 10 data-dependent MS/MS scans on the most abundant not yet sequenced isotopes (top10 method). Target value for the full scan MS spectra was 3 × 106 charges in the 300−1650 m/z range with a maximum injection time of 20 ms and a resolution of 70,000 at m/z 400. Isolation of precursors was performed with the quadrupole at window of 3 Th. Precursors were fragmented by higher-energy collisional dissociation with normalized collision energy of 25% (the appropriate energy is calculated using this percentage, and m/z and charge state of the precursor). MS/MS scans were acquired at a resolution of 17,500 at m/z 400 with an ion target value of 1 × 105, a maximum injection time of 120 ms, and fixed first mass of 100 Th. Repeat sequencing of peptides was minimized by excluding the selected peptide candidates for 40 s.
MS raw files were analyzed by the MaxQuant (version 1.4.3.20) and peak lists were searched against the human Uniprot FASTA database (version Nov 2016), and a common contaminants database (247 entries) by the Andromeda search engine as previously described. As fixed modification cysteine carbamidomethylation and as variable modifications, hydroxylation of proline and methionine oxidation was used. False discovery rate was set to 0.01 for proteins and peptides (minimum length of seven amino acids) and was determined by searching a reverse database. Enzyme specificity was set as C-terminal to arginine and lysine, and a maximum of two missed cleavages were allowed in the database search. Peptide identification was performed with an allowed precursor mass deviation up to 4.5 ppm after time-dependent mass calibration and an allowed fragment mass deviation of 20 ppm. For label-free quantification in MaxQuant the minimum ratio count was set to two. For matching between runs, the retention time alignment window was set to 30 min and the match time window was 1 min. The mass spectrometry proteomics data have been deposited to the ProteomeXchange Consortium via the PRIDE [1] partner repository with the dataset identifier PXD012307.
QDSP analysis intensities were first normalized such that the mean log2 intensities of the young and the old samples are zero, respectively. Using the normalized intensities, a two-way ANOVA with the two-factor treatment (old/young) and solubility fraction (FR1, FR2, FR3, INSOL) and the corresponding interaction term was performed using the R function aov(). Proteins significant in the interaction term correspond to proteins for which the solubility profile changes between young and old mice. Therefore, the corresponding p value was used for filtering the significantly changed profiles after FDR correction.
scRNA-seq, bulk RNA-seq, and proteome integration
In silico bulk samples were generated by summing UMI counts across all cells within one mouse sample. Differential gene expression analysis of in silico bulk samples was performed using the R package DESeq2 (v1.20.0).To integrate scRNA-seq, bulk RNA-seq, and protein data, the following approach was used. Raw count data from the in silico bulk and whole lung tissue bulk were normalized using the voom() function of the limma R package. Next, in silico bulk, whole lung tissue bulk, and protein data were merged on a set of genes present in all three data sets and quantile normalized. This merged and quantile normalized expression matrix was then subjected to PCA.
Some statistical and bioinformatics operations, such as normalization, pattern recognition, cross-omics comparisons, and multiple-hypothesis testing corrections, were performed with the Perseus software package. The two-dimensional annotation enrichment test used to compare proteome and transcriptome is based on a two-dimensional generalization of the nonparametric two-sample test. The false discovery rate is stringently controlled by correcting for multiple hypothesis testing.
Flow cytometry
Isolated total lung cell suspensions were used to detect and quantify cell populations and activation by flow cytometry. We depleted red blood cells by positive selection of Ter199 cells, followed by CD45 bead separation (Miltenyi Biotec; Bergish Gladbach, 130-052-301). Next, we analyzed cells by fluorescence-activated cell sorting (FACS) cell suspensions before and after CD45 separation and stained cell suspensions with anti-mouse CD31 (Biolegend, 102419), EpCAM (Biolegend, 118225), and H2-K1 (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, 12-5998-81). Cells were stained in the dark at 4 °C for 20 min. CD45 lineage-negative cells were stained with Nile red (Santa Cruz Biotechnology, sc-203747) in a 1:1000 dilution for 10 min at 4 °C, as previously reported.Cells were sorted using the CD45-negative fraction of the cell isolate stained for anti-mouse CD31, and EpCAM antibodies. Epithelial cells were sorted as CD31− cells and EpCAM+ cells. For sorting macrophages we used the CD45-positive fraction and stained with anti-mouse CD11c (Biolegend, 117310), CD11b (Biolegend, 101216), MHC II (Biolegend, 107615), Siglec-F (552126, BD Pharmingen), and Ly6G (Biolegend, 127627) antibodies. For flow cytometry sorting, neutrophils were excluded by selection of Ly6G-negative cells. Macrophages were sorted as MHCII+, CD11c+, CD11b+ as previously described. Data acquisition was performed in a BD Fortessa flow cytometer (Becton Dickinson, Heidelberg, Germany). All stainings were performed per 300,000 cells in the following dilutions: CD31 (1:300), EpCAM (1:50), H2-K1 (1:50), CD11c (1:100), Siglec-F(1:20), CD11b (1:25), MHCII (1:50), and Ly6G (1:10).
Data were analyzed using the FlowJo software (TreeStart Inc., Ashland, OR, USA). Data were reported as absolute numbers (cells/μl), normalized by bead counts (BD Truecount TM Beads tubes; BD Biosciences, Heidelberg, Germany) (Supplementary Fig 5). For H2-K1 and Nile red, data were analyzed by mean fluorescence intensity (MFI). Negative thresholds for gating were set according to isotype-labeled and unstained controls.
Bulk RNA-sequencing and analysis
RNA was isolated from whole lung tissue using the Qiagen RNeasyⓇ Mini Kit (#74104) according to the manufacturer's recommendations. The RNA isolate was thereafter enriched for poly-A templates and submitted for whole mRNA sequencing on the Illumina HiSeq4000.
Whole lung tissue bulk RNA next-generation sequencing reads were aligned to the mouse reference genome mm10 using STAR (version 2.2.1). Read summarization was performed using the featureCounts (version 1.5.0) tool. To statistically evaluate the agreement between the in silico bulk and true bulk RNA-seq data, Spearman's correlation coefficients were calculated on the gene expression profiles between all sample pairs and the averages of both modalities. Differential gene expression analysis of whole lung tissue bulk samples was performed using the R package DESeq2 (v1.20.0).
To identify potential age-dependent alterations in tissue composition, the whole lung tissue bulk RNA-seq were integrated with the scRNA-seq-derived cell-type signatures. Kolmogorov–Smirnov test was used to statistically evaluate the enrichment of cell-type marker genes in the fold changes derived from the differential expression analysis of the whole lung tissue bulk RNA-seq. The p values were limited to the range from 1 to 1e−50.
Flow-sorted macrophages and epithelial cells were immediately lysed after sorting and cDNA synthesis was performed using the Smart-Seq® v4 Ultra® Low Input RNA Kit for Sequencing (TaKaRa, 634896). For each sample, 200 pg of pre-amplified cDNA from an estimated 2000 cells was tagmented by Nextera XT (Illumina) according to the manufacturer’s protocol and submitted for sequencing on the Illumina HiSeq4000.
Flow-sorted bulk RNA next-generation sequencing reads were aligned to the mouse reference genome mm10 using STAR (version 2.2.1). Read summarization was performed using the featureCounts (version 1.5.0) tool. To increase comparability between bulk and single-cell RNA-seq data, a total of 30 in silico bulk samples were generated by summing the counts from all cells belonging to the alveolar macrophages and type-2 pneumocytes clusters for each mouse. Next, PCA was calculated for these in silico bulk samples using the alveolar macrophages and type-2 pneumocytes marker genes with adjusted p value < 0.1 and fold change > 0 (Supplementary Data 1). Subsequently, the flow-sorted bulk RNA-seq samples were projected into this PCA space to show correspondence between the scRNA-seq-derived in silico bulk samples and the flow-sorted RNA-seq samples. Differential expression analysis of flow-sorted bulk RNA-seq samples was conducted using the R package limma. To statistically evaluate the agreement between the age-dependent alterations measured in the scRNA-seq and flow-sorted bulk RNA-seq data, Fisher’s exact test was used. Fisher’s exact test assesses the likelihood of genes having the same fold change direction (up- or down-regulation in old compared to young).
Proximity ligation in situ hybridization (PLISH)
Samples were prepared and processed for PLISH and immunostaining as described in Nagendran et al.. with some modifications. 14 μm mouse lung cryosections were collected on superfrost slides and allowed to air dry for 10 min. The slides were immersed in prewarmed 10 mM citrate buffer containing 0.05% lithium dodecyl sulfate at 100 °C in a water bath for 5 min. The slides were quickly removed, rinsed with diethyl pyrocarbonate (DEPC)-treated water and air dried. Seal chambers (GBL621505 Sigma-Aldrich) were applied and the sections were rehydrated with DEPC-treated water for 1 min. The samples were incubated with 0.025 mg/ml Pepsin (10108057001 Roche; from Sigma-Aldrich) in 0.1 M HCL for 5 min at 37 °C followed by a quick rinse with 1× PBS and the addition of H probes for Col4a1.
H probe sequences were: Col4a1 NM_009931.2:mmHLC2-VB01-Col4a1-5315 AGGTCAGGAATACTTACGTCGTTATGGTAGGGTTCATTGCTGTTACA, mmHRC2-VB01-Col4a1-5315 AGGTACACAGGATATAATTCTTATAGGTCGAGTAGTATAGCCAGGTT, mmHLC2-VB01-Col4a1-5385 AGGTCAGGAATACTTACGTCGTTATGGAGTTACGCGAATCCCTATAA, mmHRC2-VB01-Col4a1-5385 CCAACGAAGCGGGGTGTGTTTTATAGGTCGAGTAGTATAGCCAGGTT, mmHLC2-VB01-Col4a1-5910 AGGTCAGGAATACTTACGTCGTTATGGTTGACCTGCCTAATTGCTGA, mmHRC2-VB01-Col4a1-5910 AACAGGCTCTACGCTAGAACTTATAGGTCGAGTAGTATAGCCAGGTT, mmHLC2-VB01-Col4a1-5848 AGGTCAGGAATACTTACGTCGTTATGGATTTATTTATTTTCCATCTA, mmHRC2-VB01-Col4a1-5848 ATATATATATTTATTTACTTTTATAGGTCGAGTAGTATAGCCAGGTT, mmHLC2-VB01-Col4a1-5753 AGGTCAGGAATACTTACGTCGTTATGGAAGTTTGTGTTTGGGGCTGA, mmHRC2-VB01-Col4a1-5753 CATAGTACCACACAGGGCATTTATAGGTCGAGTAGTATAGCCAGGTT.
Connector circle CCC2.1: 5′ATTCCTGACCTAACAAACATGCGTCTATAGTGGAGCCACATAATTAAACCTGGCTAT 3′.
Variable bridge VB01-P1: ACTACTCGACCTATAACCATAACGACGTAAGT.
Label probe: LP1m-Cy5: 5′Cy5/ CTATACTACTCGACCTATA.
Immunofluorescence and histology
For immunofluorescence microscopy, mouse lungs were perfused with PBS, fixed in 4% paraformaldehyde (pH 7.0), and embedded in paraffin for formalin-fixed, paraffin-embedded sections. The paraffin sections (3.5 µm) were deparaffinized and rehydrated, and the antigen retrieval was accomplished by pressure-cooking (30 s at 125 °C and 10 s at 90 °C) in citrate buffer (10 mM, pH 6.0). After blocking for 1 h at room temperature with 5% bovine serum albumin, the lung sections were incubated with the primary antibodies overnight at 4 °C, incubated with the secondary antibodies (1:250) for 2 h, followed by 4′,6-diamidino-2-phenylindole (DAPI; Sigma-Aldrich, 1:2000) for 20 min at room temperature. Images were acquired with an LSM 710 microscope (Zeiss). The following primary (1) and secondary (2) antibodies were used: (1) CC10 rabbit (Santa Cruz, sc-25554, 1:100), Foxj1 mouse (Santa Cruz, sc-53139, 1:50), collagen IV rabbit (Abcam, ab6586, 1:100), (2) donkey anti-mouse Alexa Fluor (AF) 647 (Invitrogen, A21447), donkey anti-rabbit AF 568 (Invitrogen, A10042), and donkey anti-goat AF 488 (Invitrogen, A21202). Counterstain with LipidTox was performed using HCS LipidTOX deep red neutral lipid stain (Invitrogen, H34477, 1:200).
The frequency of ciliated (nuclear Foxj1+) and club cells (CC10+) were quantified by counting 2647 cells, covering a total length of 22 mm airway in 28 individual airways (young, n = 14; old n = 14) of 2 mice of each age group. We normalized cell numbers to the total length of their respective airway using the ZEN 2.3 SP1 software for image processing.
Reporting summary
Further information on experimental design is available in the Nature Research Reporting Summary linked to this article.
Code availability
The code to reproduce the analyses and figures described in this study can be found at: github.com/theislab/2018_Angelidis.