ABSTRACT:
Proteome profiling data of eight xenografted cutaneous and cerebellar metastasis of human melanoma cells were combined with eicosanoid and glutathione measurements as well as multiparametric morphologic analyses and immunofluorescence. The analyses revealed significant differences in the expression of molecules associated with metastatic properties, while lacking any commonalties when comparing the metastatic variants from four different donors. Apparently we lack appropriate meta-analysis strategies making use of the large number of presently identified metastasis-associated molecules for successful classification of cells.
Graphical Abstract
Highlights
Comprehensive molecular profiling of cutaneous and cerebellar metastasis variants.
Identification of differentially regulated metastasis-associated molecules.
Evidence for individually distinct patterns of metastasis-associated molecules.
Highlighting the evident need for establishing meta-analyses strategies.
The prediction of metastatic properties from molecular analyses still poses a major challenge. Here we aimed at the classification of metastasis-related cell properties by proteome profiling making use of cutaneous and brain-metastasizing variants from single melanomas sharing the same genetic ancestry. Previous experiments demonstrated that cultured cells derived from these xenografted variants maintain a stable phenotype associated with a differential metastatic behavior: The brain metastasizing variants produce more spontaneous micro-metastases than the corresponding cutaneous variants. Four corresponding pairs of cutaneous and metastatic cells were obtained from four individual patients, resulting in eight cell-lines presently investigated. Label free proteome profiling revealed significant differences between corresponding pairs of cutaneous and cerebellar metastases from the same patient. Indeed, each brain metastasizing variant expressed several apparently metastasis-associated proteomic alterations as compared with the corresponding cutaneous variant. Among the differentially expressed proteins we identified cell adhesion molecules, immune regulators, epithelial to mesenchymal transition markers, stem cell markers, redox regulators and cytokines. Similar results were observed regarding eicosanoids, considered relevant for metastasis, such as PGE2 and 12-HETE. Multiparametric morphological analysis of cells also revealed no characteristic alterations associated with the cutaneous and brain metastasis variants. However, no correct classification regarding metastatic potential was yet possible with the present data. We thus concluded that molecular profiling is able to classify cells according to known functional categories but is not yet able to predict relevant cell properties emerging from networks consisting of many interconnected molecules. The presently observed broad diversity of molecular patterns, irrespective of restricting to one tumor type and two main classes of metastasis, highlights the important need to develop meta-analysis strategies to predict cell properties from molecular profiling data. Such base knowledge will greatly support future individualized precision medicine approaches.
METHODS:
MATERIALS AND METHODS
Cell Culture Conditions and Sample Preparations
Cutaneous human melanoma cells (YDFR-C, DP-C, M12-C and M16-C) and brain metastatic human melanoma cells (YDFR-CB, DP-CB, M12-CB and M16-CB) were previously obtained as described previously. Briefly, human melanoma cells from four different melanoma patients were inoculated subdermally in nude mice to generate cutaneous melanoma tumors. Tumors were excised, minced into single cell suspension, and put in culture, until a pure melanoma culture was obtained, representing the cutaneous (C) variants. These cells were then inoculated intracardially 2–3 times into nude mice, each time resulting in the isolation and culturing of brain metastases, until a pure melanoma culture was obtained, representing the brain metastatic (CB) variants. These cells were subsequently cultured in RPMI 1640 (1X with l-Glutamine; Gibco, Thermo Fischer Scientific, Austria) with 10% (v/v) heat inactivated fetal calf serum (FCS1, Sigma-Aldrich, Austria) and 1% (v/v) Penicillin and Streptomycin (Sigma-Aldrich) in humidified incubators at 37 °C and 5% CO2. Cells were grown in T25 polystyrene cell culture flasks with cell growth surface for adherent cells (Sarstedt, Austria) and sub-cultured every 3–4 days. Therefor the medium was removed, the cells were washed twice with 5 ml PBS and incubated with 1.5 ml Trypsin-EDTA solution 0.25% (Sigma-Aldrich) for 3 min. The reaction was stopped by adding 4 ml fully supplemented medium and centrifuged for 5 min at 220 × g. After removing the supernatant, the cells were re-suspended in fully supplemented medium and seeded in a ratio of 1:6. Cells were regularly tested for absence of mycoplasma contamination and consistency in cell growth and morphology (i.e. size distribution and aggregation coefficient) was monitored during sub-culturing as well during the experiments with CASY TT Cell Counter and Analyzer (OMNI Life Science GmbH & Co. KG, Bremen, Germany). Cells were counted with a MOXI Z Mini Automated Cell Counter (ORFLO Technologies) using Moxi Z Type M Cassettes (ORFLO Technologies) and the number of seeded cells for the experiments calculated based of these results. For the performance of the assays, cells were used between passage 2 and 25.
Animals
Male athymic nude mice (BALB/c background) were purchased from Harlan Laboratories Limited (Israel). The mice were housed and maintained in laminar flow cabinets under specific pathogen-free conditions in the animal quarters of Tel Aviv University and in accordance with current regulations and standards of the Tel-Aviv University Institutional Animal Care and Use Committee. The mice were used when they were 7–8 weeks old.
Orthotopic Inoculation of Tumor Cells and Metastasis Formation Assays
1 × 106 melanoma cells in 100 μl of 5% FCS supplemented RPMI 1640 medium were inoculated subdermally into the right thigh of male nude BALB/c mice. Brains were harvested 2 months following the inoculation and immediately frozen and stored at −70 °C, until used for RNA extraction. Detection of human cells (micrometastases) in mouse brain by RT-qPCR was performed as described previously.
Proteomics of Cytoplasmic and Nuclear Fractions
For the proteomics analysis of the cytoplasmic and nuclear fraction 2 × 106 cells of passage 2 to 4 were seeded in a T25 cell culture flask with 3 ml of fully supplemented medium. After 24 h incubation the cells were lysed as previously described. In short, the medium was removed and the cells were carefully washed with 5 ml PBS twice. The lysis buffer was added onto the cells and lysed by pushing the suspension through a needle, centrifuged and the supernatant was precipitated in ice cold ethanol (EtOH, abs. 99%; AustroAlco, Austria). The remaining nuclear pellet was lysed with a Tris-EDTA, NP-40 buffer and after centrifugation the supernatant was again precipitated and kept on −20 °C over night.
Supernatant Analysis of Eicosanoids and Proteomics
2 × 106 cells of passage 4 to 6 were seeded in a T25 cell culture flask with 3 ml fully supplemented medium and kept in the incubator. After 24 h the supernatant was removed, spiked with 10–100 nm of each internal standard (supplemental Table S1), centrifuged with 726 × g and 3 ml precipitated with 12 ml ethanol (EtOH, abs. 99%; AustroAlco) and stored at −20 °C over night. Precipitated proteins containing fetal calf serum proteins were discarded, while the eicosanoids were isolated from the supernatant. The cells were washed twice with 5 ml PBS and 3 ml of RPMI without supplements was added. After 4 h incubation the supernatant was removed, centrifuged and precipitated in ethanol overnight to obtain the secreted proteins.
Protein Sample Preparation
The proteins were used for a filter-assisted protein digest as described previously. In short, the precipitated proteins were centrifuged at 4536 × g for 30 min, the supernatant discarded and the protein pellet dried. After dissolving in sample buffer the protein concentration was determined and 20 μg of total protein was used for the digestion. After reduction with dithiothreitol and alkylation with iodacetamid (both Sigma-Aldrich) proteins were digested with Trypsin/Lys-C (MS grade; Promega Corporation, Madison, WI) and dried via vacuum centrifugation.
Eicosanoid Extraction
Samples were centrifuged (30 min, 4536 × g, 4 °C) and the supernatant transferred to a new 15 ml Falcon tube. Ethanol was evaporated via vacuum centrifugation at 37 °C until the original sample volume was restored. Samples were loaded on conditioned 30 mg/ml StrataX solid phase extraction (SPE) columns (Phenomenex, Torrance, CA). Columns were washed with 2 ml MS grade water and eicosanoids were eluted with 500 μl methanol (MeOH abs.; VWR International, Vienna, Austria) containing 2% formic acid (FA; Sigma-Aldrich). MeOH was evaporated using N2 stream at room temperature and reconstituted in 150 μl reconstitution buffer (H2O/ACN/MeOH + 0,2% FA − 65:31.5:3.5), containing a set of internal eicosanoid standards at a concentration of 10–100 nm (supplemental Table S1).
Analysis of Reduced and Oxidized Glutathione
5 × 105 cells of passage 10–12 were seeded in a 6-well polystyrene plate with cell growth surface for adherent cells (Sarstedt) with 1 ml fully supplemented medium and allowed to grow for 24 h. Cells were washed twice with 1 ml PBS. After that, 500 μl of 2.5 mm N-Ethylmaleimide (NEM, Sigma-Aldrich) in PBS was added to each well. Samples were kept in the dark for 20 min at room temperature. The NEM-PBS solution was removed; cells were washed twice with 1 ml PBS. Two hundred microliters of 80% MeOH were pipetted to each well and incubated on ice for 20 min. Cells were scraped off, transferred into an Eppendorf tube and spun down for 10 min at 13,000 × g and 4 °C. The supernatant was moved to a 500 μl Eppendorf Tube, dried under nitrogen stream and then re-suspended in 100 μl 50 mm ammonium acetate (NH4OAc; pH = 7; Sigma-Aldrich). Three hundred microliters dichloromethane were added, and samples were vortexed. Next, samples were centrifuged for 5 min at 13,000 × g and 4 °C. Forty-five microliters of the upper phase were transferred to a new tube and 2.5 μl of 5 mm Tris(2-carboxyethyl)phosphine hydrochloride (TCEP; pH = 7; Sigma-Aldrich) was added. Samples were left on a thermoshaker for 30 min at 37 °C. Afterward, 2.5 μl of 100 mm N-Ethyl-D5-Maleimide (D5-NEM, Sigma-Aldrich) were added and samples were again placed in the dark for 20 min at room temperature. Finally, samples were diluted 1:5 in 50 mm NH4OAc and stored at 4 °C until further analysis.
HPLC-MS/MS for Proteomics
For the HPLC-MS/MS analysis the peptides were resolved in 5 μl 30% formic acid and diluted with 40 μl of mobile phase A (97.9% H2O, 2% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid). 1 μl for the supernatant samples and 10 μl of cytoplasmic and nuclear samples were injected into the Dionex UltiMate 3000 RSLCnano LC system coupled to the QExactive Orbitrap MS (all Thermo Fisher Scientific). Peptides were trapped on a C18 2 cm × 100 μm precolumn and LC separation was performed on a 50 cm × 75 μm Pepmap100 analytical column (both Thermo Fisher Scientific). For the supernatant samples 1 μl of sample was injected. The 85 min HPLC method included a 43 min gradient from 7% to 40% mobile phase B (79.9% acetonitrile, 20% H2O, 0.1% formic acid) at a flow rate of 300 nL/min. For the cytoplasmic and nuclear samples 10 μl were injected. The 135 min HPLC method included a 95 min gradient from 8% to 40% mobile phase B at a flow rate of 300 nL/min. Mass spectrometric settings were the same for all fractions. The resolution on the MS1 level was set to 70,000 (at m/z = 200) with a scan range from 400 to 1400 m/z. The top eight abundant peptide ions were chosen for fragmentation at 30% normalized collision energy and resulting fragments analyzed in the Orbitrap at a resolution of 17,500 (at m/z = 200).
Proteomics Data Analysis
Raw data were subjected to the freely available software MaxQuant (version 1.6.0.1) utilizing the Andromeda search engine, followed by statistical evaluation with the Perseus software (version 1.6.0.2). For the MaxQuant search, a minimum of two peptide identifications, at least one of them being a unique peptide, was required for valid protein identification. Digestion mode was set to “Specific” choosing Trypsin/P. The peptide mass tolerance was set to 50 ppm for the first search and to 25 ppm for the main search. The false discovery rate (FDR) was set to 0.01 both on peptide and protein level, based on the q-value. The database applied for the search was the human Uniprot database (version 03/2018, reviewed entries only) with 20,316 protein entries. Further settings for the search included carbamidomethylation as fixed modification and oxidation of methionine and acetylation of the protein C terminus as variable modifications. Each peptide was allowed to have a maximum of two missed cleavages and two modifications, “Match between runs” was enabled and the alignment window set to 10 min, with the match time window of 1 min.
UHPLC-MS/MS for Eicosanoid Measurements
Analytes were separated using a Thermo Scientific Vanquish (UHPLC) system and a Kinetex® C18 - column (2.6 μm C18 100 Å, LC Column 150 × 2.1 mm; Phenomenex®). Applying a 20 min gradient flow method, starting at 35% B steadily increasing to 90% B (1–10min), going up to 99% B in 0.25 min. Flow rate was kept at 200 μl/min, 20 μl injection volume and column oven temperature was set to 40 °C. Eluent A contains H2O + 0.2% FA and eluent B ACN:MeOH (90:10) + 0.2% FA.
Mass spectrometric analysis was performed with a Q Exactive HF Quadrupole-Orbitrap mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific), equipped with a HESI source for negative ionization. Mass spectra were recorded operating from 250 to 700 m/z at a resolution of 60 000 @ 200 m/z on MS1 level. The two most abundant precursor ions were selected for fragmentation (HCD 24 normalized collision energy), preferentially molecules from an inclusion list which contained 32 m/z values specific for eicosanoids (supplemental Table S2). MS2 was operated at a resolution of 15,000 @ 200 m/z. For negative ionization, a spray voltage of 2.2 kV and a capillary temperature of 253 °C were applied, with the sheath gas set to 46 and the auxiliary gas to 10 arbitrary units.
Raw files generated by the Q-ExactiveTM OrbitrapTM were analyzed manually using Thermo Xcalibur 4.1.31.9 (Qual browser), comparing reference spectra from the Lipid Maps depository library from July 2018. For peak integration the software TraceFinderTM (version 4.1 - Thermo Scientific) was used.
UHPLC-MS/MS for Targeted Glutathione Measurements
Chromatographic separation was performed on a Kinetex 2.6 μm XB-C18 100Å (100 × 2.1 mm) column using a 1290 Infitiny UHPLC System (Agilent Technologies). Mobile phase A consisted of water with 0.2% formic acid and mobile phase B of methanol with 0.2% formic acid. The following gradient profile was run: 0 to 30% B in 5 min, 30 to 70% B in 2 min, afterward washed for 3 min at 95% B and at 10.1 min the system was reequilibrated at 0% B giving a total runtime of 12 min. Flow rate was 0.3 μl/min, the column temperature was set to 40 °C and the injection volume was 5 μl. MS detection was performed in the positive ion mode on a triple quadrupole mass spectrometer (QqQ 6490, Agilent technologies).
ESI spray voltage was 4500V, gas flow 12 L/min, gas temperature 250 °C, sheath gas temperature 400 °C, sheath gas flow 12 L/min, and nebulizer gas pressure 35 psi.
MRM transitions and the collision energies are summarized in supplemental Table S3. As quantifier in the final analysis of GSH-NEM the transition from m/z 433 to 84.2 was used, for GSH-d5NEM the transition from m/z 438 to 84.2 was used. The other transitions were used as qualifiers to ensure identity of the analytes.
GSH-NEM is a diastereomer, therefore GSH-NEM and GSH-d5NEM elute as two peaks because they have different physical and chemical properties. The areas under both peaks were summarized and used for integration and quantification. The obtained raw data was processed with Skyline (MacCoss Lab Software).
Experimental Design and Statistical Rationale
Three independent cell culture experiments were carried out for every cell line. All samples were analyzed with LC-MS/MS in 2 technical replicates which resulted in 144 measurements for the proteomics, 48 measurements for eicosanoids and 48 measurements for glutathione. The proteins were identified using MaxQuant software (version 1.6.0.1), including the Andromeda search engine. For statistical evaluation, the Perseus software (version 1.6.0.2) was used. Potential contaminants, reversed sequences and proteins identified only by site were removed. The normal distribution of the data was manually checked using the histogram function. After the Label-free quantification (LFQ) values were logarithmized to base 2, the technical replicates were averaged. Invalid values were filtered with the criteria that at least 70% of the samples per group, being each individual cell line, have valid values. After application of these procedures, a final list of 5665 protein identifications regarding cytoplasmic and nuclear fractions and 1238 proteins in the supernatants was obtained. The still missing LFQ values were then replaced from a normal distribution with a down shift of 1.8 and a width of 0.3 to enable t-tests. Volcano plots were created to analyze the significantly regulated proteins (FDR < 0.05, S0 = 0.1). Identified proteins as well as statistical values of the t-tests are available in supplemental Tables S5–S8. The heatmaps were generated by a custom R (https://www.r-project.org) script. OriginPro 2018b was used for the generation of the spiderweb plots (Fig. 4), for the bar plots (Fig. 3) as well as for the two-sided-t-tests for the eicosanoid data (S0 = 0.1) which is indicated in the heatmap (Fig. 2).
Morphological Evaluation Using Bright-field Microscopy
To obtain the multiparametric evaluation of the morphology of the melanoma variants, cells were seeded in 6-wells plates (polystyrene, Cell+ growth surface for adherent cell; Sarstedt AG & Co., Nümbrecht, DE). After 72 h settling time, bright field images were taken with an Olympus CKX53 Inverted Microscope (10× magnification). Images were analyzed manually deriving area, perimeter, minimum and maximal radius of the cells with the software CellSens Entry. Circularity (4π area/perimeter) and roundness (minimum radius/maximum radius) were calculated as previously described. For the purpose of the study, 8–10 cells were randomly chosen from 5–6 optical fields and the experiments were repeated in 5 independent cell preparations, resulting in the quantification of more than 200 cells for every condition. To avoid selection bias, image analysis was performed after acquiring all the images form all the experiments and quantification workflow was independently verified with the software Gen5 (BioTek, Winooski, VT). Determination of cell volume and diameter was performed as previously described with the cell counter analyzer CASY-TT. Briefly, cells were gently detached with trypsin and after inactivation of the enzyme 100 μl cell suspension was diluted in 10 ml CASYton solution. Measurement range threshold was optimized at the beginning of the experiments and kept constant for all the subsequent analysis. Measurements were performed in technical duplicates from 5 independent cell preparations. For the graphical representation of the results values were corrected through adjustment values as reported in supplemental Table S4 and the software Origin Pro 9.1G was used for the generation of the spiderwebs.
Immunolocalization Nrf2
For the localization of Nrf2, an immunofluorescence experiments were performed for all the melanoma variants as previously described. Briefly, cells were seeded on μ-Slides (35000 cells/well, Ibitreat coating, ibidi GmbH Martinsried, Germany), fixed with pre-warmed formaldehyde (FA, 3.7%, 15 min) and permeabilized with Triton X (0.2%, 10 min). Blocking of unspecific binding sites was obtained with donkey serum (2%, 1h). For the localization of transcription factor a mouse monoclonal and Nrf2 antibody was used (ab 89443 Abcam, dilution 1:600, 2 h). Detection was obtained with a donkey anti mouse antibody (Alexa Fluor 488-conjugated, 715–545-150 Jackson ImmunoResearch, dilution 1:1000, 1.5 h). After washing, cells were post-fixed with FA (10 min.) and glycine (100 mm) was used to mask reactive sites. Slides were mounted and sealed with Roti-Mount FluoCare with DAPI to counterstain the nuclei (Roth, Graz, Austria). Images were acquired with a Confocal LSM Zeiss 710 equipped with ELYRA PS. 1 system. Structured illumination microscopy (SIM) images were acquired with a Plan Apochromat 63X/1.4 oil objective.