ABSTRACT:
Deep proteomic analysis of mammalian cell lines would yield an inventory of the building blocks of the most commonly used systems in biological research. Mass spectrometry-based proteomics can identify and quantify proteins in a global and unbiased manner and can highlight the cellular processes that are altered between such systems. We analyzed 11 human cell lines using an LTQ-Orbitrap family mass spectrometer with a “high field” Orbitrap mass analyzer with improved resolution and sequencing speed. We identified a total of 11,731 proteins, and on average 10,361 ± 120 proteins in each cell line. This very high proteome coverage enabled analysis of a broad range of processes and functions. Despite the distinct origins of the cell lines, our quantitative results showed surprisingly high similarity in terms of expressed proteins. Nevertheless, this global similarity of the proteomes did not imply equal expression levels of individual proteins across the 11 cell lines, as we found significant differences in expression levels for an estimated two-third of them. The variability in cellular expression levels was similar for low and high abundance proteins, and even many of the most highly expressed proteins with household roles showed significant differences between cells. Metabolic pathways, which have high redundancy, exhibited variable expression, whereas basic cellular functions such as the basal transcription machinery varied much less. We harness knowledge of these cell line proteomes for the construction of a broad coverage “super-SILAC” quantification standard. Together with the accompanying paper (Schaab, C. MCP 2012, PMID: 22301388) these data can be used to obtain reference expression profiles for proteins of interest both within and across cell line proteomes.
METHODS:
EXPERIMENTAL PROCEDURES
Cell Culture Sample Preparation
Cell cultures of A549, GAMG, HEK293, HeLa, HepG2, K562, MCF7, RKO, and U2OS cells were grown with Dulbecco's modified Eagle's medium supplemented with 10% fetal bovine serum and antibiotics. LnCap and Jurkat cells were cultured with RPMI supplemented with 10% fetal bovine serum and antibiotics. Three separate cell pellets from subconfluent cultures were flash frozen in liquid nitrogen and stored at −80 °C. Cells were lysed with a buffer consisting of 0.1 m Tris-HCl, pH 7.5, 0.1 m dithiothreitol and 4% SDS, and incubated at 95 °C for 5 min. Lysates were sonicated using a Branson type sonicator and were then clarified by centrifugation at 16,100 × g for 10 min. For SILAC experiments Jurkat, HEK293, LnCap, HeLa, and K562 cells were cultured in medium containing Lys8 and Arg10 instead of the natural amino acids, and supplemented with 10% dialyzed serum. Cells were cultured for about eight doublings in the SILAC medium to reach complete labeling. For the preparation of super-SILAC mix equal amounts of heavy lysates were mixed and then combined with nonlabeled cells as described in the RESULTS section.
Protein Digestion and Fractionation
Cell lysates (100 μg) were diluted in 8 m urea in 0.1 m Tris-HCl followed by protein digestion with trypsin according to the FASP protocol. After an overnight digestion peptides were eluted from the filters with 25 mm ammonium bicarbonate buffer. The yield of the FASP digestion was more than 50%. From each sample 40 μg of peptides were separated into six fractions by strong anion exchange as described previously. Eluted peptides were concentrated and purified on C18 StageTips.
LC-MS/MS Analysis
Peptides were separated by reverse-phase chromatography on in-house made 20-cm columns (inner diameter 75 μm, 1.8 μm ReproSil-Pur C18-AQ media), using a nano-flow HPLC (Easy nanoLC, Thermo Fisher Scientific). The high performance liquid chromatography (HPLC) was coupled to an LTQ-Orbitrap Velos mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Peptides were loaded onto the column with buffer A (0.5% acetic acid) and eluted with a 200 min linear gradient from 2 to 30% buffer B (80% acetonitrile, 0.5% acetic acid). After the gradient the column was washed with 90% buffer B and re-equilibrated with buffer A.
Mass spectra were acquired in a data-dependent manner, with an automatic switch between MS and MS/MS scans using a top 10 method. MS spectra were acquired in the Orbitrap analyzer, with a mass range of 300–1650 Th and a target value of 106 ions. Peptide fragmentation was performed with the HCD method and MS/MS spectra were acquired in the Orbitrap analyzer and a target value of 40,000 ions. Ion selection threshold was set to 5000 counts. Two of the data sets were acquired with a high field Orbitrap cell in which the resolution was 60,000 instead of 30,000 (at 400 m/z) for the MS scans. In the first of the two replicates with the high field Orbitrap MS/MS scans were acquired with 15,000 resolution, and in the second with 7500 resolution, which is the same as in the standard Orbitrap, but with shorter transients.
Data Analysis
Raw MS files were analyzed by MaxQuant version 1.2.0.28. MS/MS spectra were searched by the Andromeda search engine against the decoy IPI-human database version 3.68 containing forward and reverse sequences (total of 174,166 entries including forward and reverse sequences). Additionally the database included 248 common contaminants. MaxQuant analysis included an initial search with a precursor mass tolerance of 20 ppm the results of which were used for mass recalibration. In the main Andromeda search precursor mass and fragment mass had an initial mass tolerance of 6 ppm and 20 ppm, respectively. The search included variable modifications of methionine oxidation and N-terminal acetylation, and fixed modification of carbamidomethyl cysteine. Minimal peptide length was set to six amino acids and a maximum of two miscleavages was allowed. The false discovery rate (FDR) was set to 0.01 for peptide and protein identifications. In the case of identified peptides that are all shared between two proteins, these are combined and reported as one protein group. For comparison between samples we used label-free quantification with a minimum of two ratio counts to determine the normalized protein intensity. For ranking of the absolute abundance of different proteins within a single sample we used the iBAQ algorithm. Protein table were filtered to eliminate the identifications from the reverse database, and common contaminants. Peptide and protein tables are given as supplemental Tables S2 and S3. The MS raw files associated with this manuscript may be downloaded from ProteomeCommons.org Tranche using the following hash: zb+OvxkUhczlFM0ja4v6fVi5BxsP9TolWFPI8qmtu4SUgyEzuQUaCHr0×89Q1A8fuLx9nGN/5ka7y+OgtOxWQg1MheoAAAAAAABhOg==.
Bioinformatic Analysis
Categorical annotation was supplied in the form of Gene Ontology (GO) biological process, molecular function, and cellular component, the TRANSFAC database as well as participation in a KEGG pathway and membership in a protein complex as defined by CORUM. The annotation matrix algorithm tests the difference of any protein annotations from the overall intensity distribution. The specific test we used is a two-dimensional version of the nonparametric Mann-Whitney test. Multiple hypothesis testing was controlled by using a Benjamini-Hochberg FDR threshold of 0.05. Fisher exact test was performed with an FDR value of 0.02.
Hierarchical clustering of proteins was performed on logarithmized intensities after filtration of the data to have at least six valid values and z-score normalization of the data, using Euclidean distances between averages. For multiple t-tests (ANOVA) replicates were grouped and the statistical test was performed with an FDR value of 0.05 and S0 = 0.5. The S0 factor was described by Tusher et al. for t test and was here generalized for ANOVA test.