ABSTRACT:
Synaptic dysfunction is an early pathogenic event in Alzheimer disease (AD). Hence the maintenance of healthy neurotransmission becomes crucial to slow or halt cognitive decline. In search of identifying proteins that could play a role in synaptic dysfunction, we studied the proteome of a highly vulnerable hippocampal region that is enriched in excitatory synapses. Our in-depth proteomic analysis suggests an impaired presynaptic signaling in AD. Using immunohistochemistry, we verified significantly reduced levels of complexin-1, complexin-2, and synaptogyrin-1 in AD.
Graphical Abstract
Highlights
Laser microdissection of highly vulnerable hippocampal region.
Proteomic analysis of postmortem human brain tissue of AD and control cases.
Decreased levels of presynaptic proteins, but not postsynaptic proteins, in AD.
Immunohistochemistry verifies decreased levels of selected presynaptic proteins.
Synaptic dysfunction is an early pathogenic event in Alzheimer disease (AD) that contributes to network disturbances and cognitive decline. Some synapses are more vulnerable than others, including the synapses of the perforant path, which provides the main excitatory input to the hippocampus. To elucidate the molecular mechanisms underlying the dysfunction of these synapses, we performed an explorative proteomic study of the dentate terminal zone of the perforant path. The outer two-thirds of the molecular layer of the dentate gyrus, where the perforant path synapses are located, was microdissected from five subjects with AD and five controls. The microdissected tissues were dissolved and digested by trypsin. Peptides from each sample were labeled with different isobaric tags, pooled together and pre-fractionated into 72 fractions by high-resolution isoelectric focusing. Each fraction was then analyzed by liquid chromatography-mass spectrometry. We quantified the relative expression levels of 7322 proteins, whereof 724 showed significantly altered levels in AD. Our comprehensive data analysis using enrichment and pathway analyses strongly indicated that presynaptic signaling, such as exocytosis and synaptic vesicle cycle processes, is severely disturbed in this area in AD, whereas postsynaptic proteins remained unchanged. Among the significantly altered proteins, we selected three of the most downregulated synaptic proteins; complexin-1, complexin-2 and synaptogyrin-1, for further validation, using a new cohort consisting of six AD and eight control cases. Semi-quantitative analysis of immunohistochemical staining confirmed decreased levels of complexin-1, complexin-2 and synaptogyrin-1 in the outer two-thirds of the molecular layer of the dentate gyrus in AD. Our in-depth proteomic analysis provides extensive knowledge on the potential molecular mechanism underlying synaptic dysfunction related to AD and supports that presynaptic alterations are more important than postsynaptic changes in early stages of the disease. The specific synaptic proteins identified could potentially be targeted to halt synaptic dysfunction in AD.
METHODS:
EXPERIMENTAL PROCEDURES
Experimental Design and Statistical Rationale
This study consists of two stages in which we first studied the proteome of the outer two-thirds of the ML of the DG in the exploratory cohort of five AD and five neurologically healthy control cases using an unbiased MS approach, and then performed an immunohistochemical analysis of three identified proteins in the verification cohort of an additional five AD and seven neurologically healthy control cases. The relatively low number of biological replicates used in the proteomics study were chosen because of the extensive work-load required to perform laser microdissection (LMD), and the aim to reach as deep as possible into the proteome through extensive fractionation performed with the high resolution isoelectric focusing (HiRIEF) protocol (72 fractions) before liquid chromatography-mass spectrometry (LC-MS). No technical replicates were performed, primarily because of very limited amount of clinical material, but also as our previous experience show very low technical variability between MS runs using HiRIEF LC-MS. The validity of the cohort was, however, confirmed by the low variability between samples and the fact that AD and control samples separated well in a principal component analysis (PCA) (Fig. 2A).
The hypothesis tested for each protein was that they were differentially expressed in AD samples compared with control samples. As we cannot assume normal distribution in the data using Shapiro-Wilk test, a non-parametric statistical method, DEqMS (Differential Expression analysis of quantitative Mass Spectrometry data, Zhou et al., manuscript under consideration for publication elsewhere, R package in Bioconductor) was used. DEqMS works on top of limma package and considers the detected number of peptide spectra matches (PSMs) per peptide while calculating t-statistics. Benjamini-Hochberg method was used for correction for multiple hypothesis testing. An overview of the experimental workflow is shown in Fig. 1. The details of the experimental design and statistical rationale are explained in each subsection.
Case Selection
Frozen hippocampal tissues were obtained from five sporadic AD and five control cases from the Netherlands Brain Bank (Exploratory cohort). AD cases were clinically diagnosed according to previously published research criteria, and definitive diagnosis was confirmed pathologically by using immunohistochemical staining against amyloid plaques and neurofibrillary tangles. We selected AD cases with relatively early stages of AD pathology (AD Braak stage 4 and amyloid deposits stage C). Control cases showed no sign of neurological or psychiatric disorders and presented little or no pathological alterations beyond normal age-appropriate changes including a few plaques and tangles (AD Braak stage 0–2 and amyloid deposits stage 0-B). For immunohistochemical analysis, we obtained a different set of paraffin-embedded hippocampal sections from five AD and seven control cases from the Carroll A. Campbell Jr. Neuropathology Laboratory (CCNL) Brain Bank at the Medical University of South Carolina (Verification cohort). Each of these cases in the verification cohort had undergone a full neuropathological diagnosis including Braak and CERAD assessments. All cases in the respective cohorts were used throughout the studies. Demographic characteristics of all cases used in this study are shown in supplemental Table S1. All donors or their next-of-kin gave informed consent. This study was approved by the Regional Ethical Review Board in Stockholm (2015/18/03–31/02) and had also obtained Institutional Review Board approvals by the VU Medical Center and the Medical University of South Carolina.
Preparation of Tissue Samples for LMD
Consecutive sections (20 μm) were cut from the frozen hippocampal tissues using a cryostat (Leica Microsystems, Wetzlar, Germany) and mounted on polyethylene naphthalate membrane coated slides (1.0 PEN(D), Zeiss, Oberkochen, Germany). Slides were air-dried for 5 min, fixed in 75% ethanol for 1 min and stained with toluidine blue (Sigma-Aldrich, St. Louis, Missouri) for 1 min. Slides were rinsed with distilled water, air-dried and finally stored at −20 °C overnight. Toluidine blue stains the nucleus of all types of cells and allowed us to identify the ML of the DG which is located between the dentate granule cell layer and the hippocampal fissure. The outer two-thirds of the ML, covering the middle and the outer ML, was microdissected using LMD 6000/7000 (Leica Microsystem). To obtain enough amount of tissue for downstream proteomics approach, ∼0.6 mm3 of microdissected tissues were collected from 20–30 sections per case. No obvious anatomical differences were observed between the first and the last section during LMD. Finally, the microdissected tissues were stored at −20 °C until further use.
Sample Preparation for Mass Spectrometry
The microdissected tissue was dissolved in SDS-lysis buffer (4% SDS, 25 mm Hepes pH 7.6, 1 mm DTT). Lysates were heated at 95 °C for 5 min and then sonicated for 1 min to shear DNA. Samples were centrifuged at 13,000 × g to remove cell debris. The supernatant was collected and alkylated with 4 mm chloroacetamide. A modified Sera-Mag SP3 protocol was performed for sample clean-up. The SP3 beads-protein mixture was digested first by Lys-C (Pierce, Thermo Scientific, Waltham, Massachusetts) for 16 h prior to trypsin digestion (16 h). Finally, the peptides were eluted from the beads-protein mixture. Peptide concentration was measured by DC-protein assay (Bio-Rad, Hercules, California), and 45 μg of peptides from each sample were labeled with ten different amine-reactive isobaric tandem mass tags (TMTs) (TMT10plex 126–131Da, Thermo Scientific). An aliquot of ∼2 μg was suspended in LC mobile phase A and 1 μg was injected on the LC-MS to determine the labeling efficiency for each TMT-tag. Finally, the sample were pooled, and sample clean-up was applied by solid phase extraction (SPE strata-X-C, Phenomenex, Torrance, California), and purified samples were dried in a SpeedVac.
HiRIEF Separation
The pre-fractionation was done using HiRIEF. The pooled sample (450 μg) was dissolved in 250 μl of 8 m urea and 1% IPG pharmalyte (broad range pH 3–10, GE Healthcare, Chicago, Illinois), and the IPG drystrip was rehydrated overnight. The peptides were focused on the gel strip based on their isoelectric point and eluted into 72 contiguous fractions, as described previously.
Mass Spectrometry
For each LC-MS run of a HiRIEF fraction, the auto-sampler (UltiMate™ 3000 RSLCnano System, Thermo Scientific Dionex) dispensed 20 μl of mobile phase A (95% water, 5% DMSO, 0.1% formic acid) into the corresponding well of the microtitre plate, and 10 μl were injected to the LC-MS. Samples were trapped on a C18 guard-desalting column (Acclaim PepMap 100, 75 μm × 2 cm, nanoViper, C18, 5 μm, 100Å), and separated on a 50 cm long C18 column (Easy spray PepMap RSLC, C18, 2 μm, 100Å, 75 μm × 50 cm). At a constant flow of 250 nl/min, the curved gradient went from 2% mobile phase B (5% water, 5% DMSO, 95% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid) up to 40% solvent B in each fraction as shown in the supplemental Table S2, followed by a steep increase to 100% solvent B in 5 min. Online liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS) was performed using a hybrid Q-Exactive-HF mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific). FTMS master scans with 70,000 resolution (and mass range 300–1700 mass to charge ratio (m/z)) were followed by data-dependent MS/MS (35 000 resolution) on the top five ions using higher energy collision dissociation at 30–40% normalized collision energy. Precursors were isolated with a 2 m/z window. Automatic gain control targets were 1 × 106 for MS1 and 1 × 105 for MS2. Maximum injection times were 100 ms for MS1 and 150–200 ms for MS2. The entire duty cycle lasted ∼2.5 s. Dynamic exclusion was used with 60 s duration. Precursors with unassigned charge state or charge state 1 were excluded. An underfill ratio of 1% was used.
Peptide and Protein Identification
Orbitrap raw MS/MS files were converted to mzML format using msConvert from the ProteoWizard tool suite. Spectra were then searched using MSGF+ (v10072) and Percolator (v2.08), where search results from eight subsequent fractions were grouped for Percolator target/decoy analysis. All searches were done against the human protein subset of Ensembl 75 in the Galaxy platform, including 51,153 entries. MSGF+ settings included precursor mass tolerance of 10 ppm, fragment ion mass tolerance of 0.02 Da, fully-tryptic peptides, maximum peptide length of 50 amino acids, a maximum charge of 6 and maximum 2 missed cleavages. Fixed modifications were TMT10plex on lysine residues and peptide N termini, and carbamidomethylation on cysteine residues, a variable modification was used for oxidation on methionine residues. Quantification of TMT10plex reporter ions was done using OpenMS project's IsobaricAnalyzer (v2.0). PSMs found at 1% false discovery rate (FDR) were used to infer gene identities. Protein quantification was based on TMT10plex reporter ions and calculated using TMT PSM ratios to the entire sample set (all 10 TMT-channels) and normalized to the sample median. The median PSM TMT reporter ratio from peptides that are unique to a gene symbol was then used for quantification. Only one unique peptide was required to identify a protein, and a protein FDR cut-off of 1% was applied to the list of gene-centric proteins using the picked-FDR method. Peptide sequences, m/z, modifications, peptide identification scores, accession numbers, number of peptides, percentage coverage and quantification measurements for each peptide and protein has been deposited to the ProteomeXchange Consortium using the PRIDE repository (dataset identifier: PXD014557). Proteins that were not identified in all 10 cases were excluded in the analysis.
Statistical Analysis
Alterations in average protein expression between AD and control cases were calculated using DEqMS package in R (Zhou et al., manuscript under consideration for publication elsewhere), because the data did not show normal distribution using Shapiro-Wilk test. DEqMS works on top of limma package and considers the detected number of PSMs per peptide while calculating t-statistics. DEqMS is available at Bioconductor, and the package is also deposited at GitHub (https://github.com/yafeng/DEqMS). Benjamini-Hochberg method was used for multiple hypothesis testing and a cut-off level of 10% FDR was applied.
Multivariate data analyses were performed to find the biggest variation in our dataset using an unsupervised PCA in SIMCA v15. A heat map of differentially expressed proteins (log2 fold change −/+ 0.7 and FDR <10%) was generated using Morpheus (Broad Institute) and hierarchical clustering with complete linkage based on Pearson distance metrics was applied to visualize the expression profile between AD and control cases. To compare demographic characteristics (including age, gender and postmortem interval (PMI), pH and ApoE) between AD and control groups, we did univariate analyses using Mann Whitney test in GraphPad PRISM 7.0 (San Diego, CA). Statistical analysis of semi-quantitative densitometry assessment of immunohistochemical staining was carried out using Mann Whitney test in GraphPad PRISM 7.0 (San Diego, CA).
Bioinformatics Analysis
Enrichment Analyses
To have an overview of which biological processes might be affected in the outer two-thirds of the ML of the DG in AD, we used gene set enrichment analysis (GSEA, Broad Institute). This type of analysis is based on the molecular signature database (v6.1) that contains gene sets derived from gene ontology (GO) annotations. We ran a running-sum statistic method, in which all of the identified genes were ranked from the most increased to the most decreased expression regardless of their p- and FDR-values (GO database from 16–02-2019). Ontologies with p < 0.01 and FDR <5% were considered significantly enriched which is considerably more stringent than the GSEA guideline. Additionally, we performed a second type of enrichment analysis using the GOrilla tool (GO database from 27–04-2019). Two unranked lists of proteins, a target list consisting of differentially expressed proteins (FDR <10%) and a background list, which is all the identified proteins, were uploaded. We performed this analysis for decreased and increased proteins separately. Ontologies with FDR <5% were considered statistically significant. Both in GSEA and GOrilla tools, Benjamini-Hochberg method was used to calculate FDR-values.
Pathway Analyses
Ingenuity pathway analysis (IPA, Qiagen, Hilden, Germany) was used for systemic analysis of our dataset in order to interpret our findings in a biological context. AD/C protein ratio (log2) of all quantified proteins, p- and FDR-values were uploaded into the IPA, and core analysis was performed. We allowed both direct and indirect relationships and a search on published data carried out in mouse, rat and human species, and applied 10% FDR cut-off to avoid having relations that could occur just by chance. Differentially expressed proteins were then analyzed in three categories: biological functions, enriched molecular networks, and upstream regulators. For each biological function and upstream regulator, IPA calculates a p value using right-tailed Fisher's exact test and p < 0.01 is considered statistically significant. Moreover, IPA makes a prediction about the activation state by calculating a z-score, which are considered significant if z-score >2 or z-score <−2. Lastly, IPA can create molecular networks based on the identified proteins, and for each network, IPA assigns a score that is calculated from hypergeometric distribution and right-tailed Fisher's Exact test.
Immunohistochemistry
Paraffin-embedded hippocampal sections (5 μm) were rehydrated and heat-induced epitope retrieval was applied using citrate buffer (pH 6) or Tris-EDTA buffer (pH 9) at 110 °C for 30 min. EnVision Dual Link System (Dako, Agilent, Santa Clara, California) containing peroxidase, HRP-labeled polymer, DAB and DAB substrate buffer, was used to visualize DAB staining. After blocking endogenous peroxidase activity for 5 min, sections were blocked with goat serum (Dako, Agilent) for 30 min at room temperature, and then stained with the following primary antibodies overnight at 4 °C: complexin-1 (CPLX1, Protein Tech, Rosemont, Illinois, 1:200 dilution), complexin-2 (CPLX2, Protein Tech, 1:200 dilution), and synaptogyrin-1 (SYNGR1, Sigma-Aldrich, 1:200 dilution). Antibody dilutions were prepared in antibody diluent (Dako, Agilent). Sections were then incubated with HRP-labeled polymer for 1 h at room temperature, followed by incubating with DAB. Finally, sections were dehydrated and coverslipped using VectaMount Permanent Mounting Medium (Vector Laboratories, Burlingame, California). Sections from AD and control groups were included in the same staining experiment and using the same antibody solutions to avoid inter-staining variability. Sections were scanned using Nikon Eclipse E800 microscope and Nikon DS-Ri2 camera (10× objective, gain 1, exposure 2 ms) and NIS Elements software (Nikon Instrument, Inc., Japan), and images were analyzed on 8-bit scale using ImageJ Fiji (NIH). Mean pixel intensities of the area of interest, covering the middle and outer ML of the DG, were measured in a blinded fashion and the background, defined as the signal intensity of a region outside the tissue, was subtracted. Additionally, gross morphological observations of the staining intensity in the region of interest was checked by subjective assessment done by two independent researchers (C.E. and S.F.) in a blinded fashion. Visual scoring was performed based on a scale from 0 to 3 (0, absent; 1, mild; 2, moderate; 3, strong).