ABSTRACT:
The ProteomeTools project builds molecular and digital tools from the human proteome to facilitate biomedical and life science research. Here, we report the generation and multimodal LC-MS/MS analysis of >330,000 synthetic tryptic peptides representing essentially all canonical human gene products and exemplify the utility of this data. The resource will be extended to >1 million peptides and all data will be shared with the community via ProteomicsDB and proteomeXchange.
METHODS:
Online Methods
Synthetic peptide sets
To achieve extensive coverage of human proteins, three different sets of peptides were created or used in this study. First, a “proteotypic” peptide set covering confidently and frequently identified proteins was derived from prior mass-spectrometric evidence available in ProteomicsDB. We selected between 2 and 10 unique (at gene level) tryptic peptides for each human gene to reach a cumulative proteotypicity of ~95 % (i.e. we stopped selecting further peptides when the selected peptides covered at least 95% of all cases a particular protein was identified). Further constraints included a peptide length of 7 to 40 amino acids and no more than two missed tryptic cleavage sites. The resulting list contained 124,875 peptides covering 15,855 human Uniprot/SwissProt annotated genes. Second, a “missing proteome” set was constructed containing tryptic peptides mapping to genes which lacked confident experimental identification evidence in ProteomicsDB. Here, any gene-unique tryptic peptide between 7 to 30 amino acids in length and allowing for a maximum of one missed cleavage site was included in the selection without restricting the number of peptides per gene. The resulting list contained 140,458 peptides covering 4,818 genes. Third, we obtained a subset of the “SRMAtlas” peptides comprising 90,967 peptides mapping to 19,099 genes also covering proteins with empirical evidence and “missing” proteins. Altogether, the three sets of tryptic peptides contained 330,286 non-redundant peptides covering 19,840 human genes as annotated in Uniprot/SwissProt (Version 2016-07-20; 42,164 protein sequences) (see Supplementary Table 1).
Peptide pool design
Peptide pools for synthesis and LC-MS measurement consisted of approximately 1,000 peptides each. The peptide pools representing the “proteotypic” and “missing proteome” sets were designed to have a narrow peptide length distribution to support optimal synthesis. Near isobaric peptides (± 10 ppm) were distributed across different pools of similar length to avoid ambiguous masses in pools wherever possible (Supplementary Table 1). To this end, peptides were first ordered by length and mass. Second, the peptides were sorted by taking every nth peptide within the ordered list of peptides of one length, where n is the number of pools needed to distribute these peptides. The resulting ordering provided a well sampled sub-population of peptides with the same MW distribution. In a third step, peptides with near isobaric (± 10 ppm) mass were identified and, as long as no additional near isobaric conflict was created, distributed across pools with similar peptide length (max 2 AAs difference).
The “SRMAtlas” peptide set was acquired in 96 well plates with each well containing one individual proteotypic peptide of 7–30 amino acids in length (i. e. one peptide per well, PEPotec Grade 1, suspended in 0.1% TFA in 50% (v/v) acetonitrile/water). These were also pooled into sets of approximately 1,000 peptides. To create plate pools, the peptides from every plate were first manually pooled together resulting in mixtures of 95 peptides (one quality control peptide present in each plate was discarded to avoid accumulation of this peptide in the subsequent pooling process). To create measurement pools of ~1,000 peptides, either 10 (for fully-tryptic peptides; i.e. C-terminal K/R) or 14 (non- and semi-tryptic peptides; i.e. non-K/R C-terminal) plate pools were combined. In order to avoid bias in pools of 1000 peptides regarding mass (MW) or hydrophobicity index (HI), the pooling scheme was computed to best mimic the overall MW and HI distribution of the entire set. We used the Kolmogorov-Smirnov test (KS-test) to quantify the distance of the MW and HI distribution between mixtures of plate pools to the total distribution of the total set. Starting with a plate pool or mixture of plate pools, all other (still available) plate pools were tested to generate a combined mixture that is closest to the overall set. The best match (lowest p-value) was chosen and the process was repeated until the desired number of plate pools for combination was reached (Supplementary Figure 1). The resulting 96 measurement pools were desalted on C18 material (Waters, SepPak) before storage at -20 °C. All peptide sequences and their pool membership are listed in Supplementary Table 1.
Peptide synthesis
All peptides were individually synthesized following the Fmoc-based solid phase synthesis strategy. A carboxyamidomethylated cysteine building block was used to eliminate the need for cysteine modification prior to MS analysis. Peptides of the “proteotypic” and “missing gene” sets were synthesized by SPOT-synthesis on cellulose membranes at a scale of approximately 2–5 nmol of peptide per spot as described. Depending on the length of peptides in a given pool, up to 6 peptide pools (containing at most 6,000 peptides; see Supplementary Notes) were synthesized in parallel using a purpose built peptide synthesizer. Five quality control peptides were synthesized along with every peptide pool. Peptides were cleaved from the membrane into pools of 1,000 peptides following the design criteria described above. Following solvent evaporation, peptides were stored at -20 °C until use. Peptides from the “SRMAtlas” set were synthesized in 96 well synthesizers (Thermo-Fisher Scientific, PEPotec Grade 1) at a scale of 0.1 mg per peptide. They were pooled and stored as described above.
Sample preparation for mass spectrometry
Dried peptide pools were initially solubilized in 100% DMSO to a concentration of 10 pmol/μl by vortexing for 30 min at room temperature. The pools were then diluted to 10% DMSO using 1% formic acid in HPLC grade water to a stock solution concentration of 1 pmol/μl and stored at −20 °C until use. 10 μl of the stock solution were transferred to a 96-well plate and spiked with two retention time (RT) standards. The first set of retention time peptides (JPT Peptide Technologies) consisted of 66 peptides with non-naturally occurring peptide sequences (Supplementary Table 1). 200 fmol per peptide was used per injection. The second RT standard (Pierce, Thermo Scientific) comprised 15 13C-labelled peptides and 100 fmol per peptide was used per injection. Samples in the resulting 96-well plates were vacuum dried and stored at −20 °C until use.
Nanoscale liquid chromatography
For LC-MS analysis, the peptide pools in the 96 well plates were dissolved in 0.1% formic acid in water to a concentration of 100 fmol/μl per peptide (residual DMSO concentration of ~1%). An estimated amount of 200 fmol of every peptide in a pool was subjected to liquid chromatography using a Dionex 3000 HPLC system (Thermo Fisher Scientific) using in-house packed C18 columns. The setup consisted of a 75 μm × 2 cm trap column packed with 5 μm particles of Reprosil Pur ODS-3 (Dr. Maisch GmbH) and a 75 μm × 40 cm analytical column, packed with 3 μm particles of C18 Reprosil Gold 120 (Dr. Maisch GmbH). Peptides were loaded onto the trap column using 0.1% FA in water. Separation of the peptides was performed by using a linear gradient from 4% to 35% ACN with 5% DMSO, 0.1% formic acid in water over 50 min followed by a washing step (60 min total method length) at a flow rate of 300 nL/min and a column temperature of 50 °C.
Mass spectrometry
The HPLC system was coupled on-line to an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Each peptide pool was first measured using a “survey method” consisting of an Orbitrap full MS scan (60k resolution, 5e5 AGC-target, 50 ms maximum injection time, 360–1300 m/z, profile mode), followed by MS2 events with a duty cycle of 2 s for the most intense precursors and a dynamic exclusion set to 5 s as follows: (i) HCD scan with 28% normalized collision energy and Orbitrap readout (15k resolution, 1e5 AGC-target, 22 ms maximum injection time, inject ions for all available parallelizable time enabled, 1.3 m/z isolation width, centroid mode); (ii) CID scan with 35% normalized collision energy and ion trap readout (rapid mode, 3e4 AGC target, 0.25 activation Q, 22 ms maximum injection time, inject ions for all available parallelizable time enabled, 1.3 m/z isolation width, centroid mode). From this data, inclusion lists with retention time constraints were generated for each pool and used for three subsequent LC-MS measurements focusing on different acquisition types. Precursors detected in the “survey method” were scheduled for fragmentation within a 5 min RT window. Peptides lacking identification in the survey run were added to the inclusion as 2+ or 3+ precursor ions, but without retention time scheduling. (1) The “HCD” method consisted of an Orbitrap MS1 scan (120k resolution, 5e5 AGC-target, 50 ms maximum injection time, 360–1300 m/z, profile mode) followed by 3 seconds of MS2 scans with consecutive HCD scans at 20, 25 and 30 normalized collision energy and Orbitrap readout (15k resolution, 1e5 AGC-target, 20 ms maximum injection time, inject ions for all available parallelizable time enabled, 1.3 m/z isolation width, centroid mode). (2) The “IT” method consisted of an Orbitrap MS1 scan (120k resolution, 5e5 AGC-target, 50 ms maximum injection time, 360–1300 m/z, profile mode) followed by 3 seconds of MS2 scans with (i) CID scan with 35 normalized collision energy and ion trap readout (rapid mode, 3e4 AGC target, 0.25 activation Q, 20 ms maximum injection time, inject ions for all available parallelizable time enabled, 1.3 m/z isolation width, centroid mode); (ii) HCD scan with 28 normalized collision energy and ion trap, (iii) HCD scan with 20 normalized collision energy and Orbitrap readout; (iv) HCD scan with 23 normalized collision energy and Orbitrap readout. (3) The “ETD” method consisted of an Orbitrap MS1 scan (120k resolution, 5e5 AGC-target, 50 ms maximum injection time, 360–1300 m/z, profile mode) followed by 3 seconds of MS2 scans with (i) ETD scan using charge dependent ETD parameters and Orbitrap readout; (ii) EThcD scan using charge dependent ETD parameters and supplemental HCD activation with 28% normalized collision energy and Orbitrap readout; (iii) ETciD scan using charge dependent ETD parameters and supplemental CID activation with 35 normalized collision energy and Orbitrap readout with settings described above.
Data processing
The logistics of data processing and MS method generation was governed by an in-house database (Supplementary Figure 8). RAW data were analysed using MaxQuant version 1.5.3.30 searching individual LC-MS runs against pool-specific databases (see Supplementary Table 2). If not mentioned otherwise, default parameters were used: Carbamidomethylated cysteine was specified as fixed modification, methionine oxidation as variable modification. First search tolerance was set to 20 ppm, main search tolerance to 4.5 ppm and filtered for peptide and protein FDR of 1 %. Retention time windows of ±5 min were corrected for drifts using the internal retention time standards. The pool-specific inclusion lists were generated from confidently identified precursors (from the survey method) which passed an ad-hoc Andromeda score cut-off of 100. For analysis of synthesis side product, the survey MS run was searched with unspecific digestion and “dependent peptides” enabled.
Conserved peptide sequences in human and mouse
A current mouse protein sequence database representing 16,336 mouse genes was obtained from Swissprot (version dated 07/09/2016, 16,818 sequences). The database was in silico digested using tryptic cleavage specificity (no proline rule) and a maximum of 2 missed cleavages. The resulting peptide list was filtered for unique entries and mapped against our sequence list of peptides (see Supplementary Notes and Supplementary Table 3).
Comparison QTOF vs Fusion Lumos spectra
We systematically compared spectra generated in this project on an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos (Thermo) to a spectral library generated on a 5600 TripleTOF (QTOF) mass spectrometer (AB Sciex). For this, intensities of matching annotated fragment ions of the highest scoring (>100) beam-type CID spectrum per acquired normalized collision energy (Lumos) were correlated using Pearson correlation to the corresponding beam-type CID QTOF spectrum (acquired with rolling collision energy).
Fragmentation Prediction
First, MaxQuant result files were parsed and only spectra of unmodified doubly charged peptides with a PIF > 0.8 and a score of higher than 100 were selected for training. For each combination of amino acids N-terminal (left) and C-terminal (right) of the fragmentation position at a given normalized collision energy, a local polynomial regression (LOESS) model was fitted using the peptide length normalized fragmentation position and the base peak intensity (BPI) normalized intensity of the y-ions (see Supplementary Figure 11–13). The resulting models were tested on pool 66 of the “proteotypic” set using the same peptide selection criteria. Each possible y-ion for each peptide passing the filters was predicted using the corresponding LOESS-fit. The predicted y-ion intensities were scored against the measured spectra using the Pearson correlation coefficient.