ABSTRACT:
Summary
We analyzed proteomes of colon and rectal tumors previously characterized by the Cancer Genome Atlas (TCGA) and performed integrated proteogenomic analyses. Somatic variants displayed reduced protein abundance compared to germline variants. mRNA transcript abundance did not reliably predict protein abundance differences between tumors. Proteomics identified five proteomic subtypes in the TCGA cohort, two of which overlapped with the TCGA “MSI/CIMP” transcriptomic subtype, but had distinct mutation, methylation, and protein expression patterns associated with different clinical outcomes. Although copy number alterations showed strong cis- and trans-effects on mRNA abundance, relatively few of these extend to the protein level. Thus, proteomics data enabled prioritization of candidate driver genes. The chromosome 20q amplicon was associated with the largest global changes at both mRNA and protein levels; proteomics data highlighted potential 20q candidates including HNF4A, TOMM34 and SRC. Integrated proteogenomic analysis provides functional context to interpret genomic abnormalities and affords a new paradigm for understanding cancer biology.
METHODS:
Methods Summary
All tumor samples for the current study were obtained through the TCGA Biospecimen Core Resource (BCR) as described previously. No other selection criteria other than availability were applied for this study. Patient-derived xenograft tumors from established Basal and Luminal-B breast cancer intrinsic subtypes  were raised subcutaneously in 8 week old NOD.Cg-Prkdcscid Il2rgtm1Wjl/SzJ mice (Jackson Labs, Bar Harbor, Maine) as previously described. Normal colon biopsies were obtained from screening colonoscopies performed between July 2006 and October 2010 under Vanderbilt University IRB approval #061096.
Tissue proteins were extracted and tryptic peptide digests were analyzed by multidimensional liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry. Xenograft QC samples were run after every 5 colorectal tumor samples. Raw data were processed for peptide identification by database and spectral library searching and identified peptides were assembled as proteins and mapped to gene identifiers for proteogenomic comparisons. Quantitative proteomic comparisons were based on spectral count data. Detailed descriptions of the samples, LC-MS/MS analysis, and data analysis methods can be found in Supplementary Methods. All of the primary mass spectrometry data on TCGA tumor samples are deposited at the CPTAC Data Coordinating Center as raw and mzML files and complete protein assembly datasets for public access (https://cptac-data-portal.georgetown.edu).
Extended Data