ABSTRACT:
Purpose
The development of leptomeningeal melanoma metastases (LMM) is a rare and devastating complication of the late-stage disease, for which no effective treatments exist. Here, we performed a multi-omics analysis of the CSF from LMM patients to determine how the leptomeningeal microenvironment shapes the biology and therapeutic responses of melanoma cells.
Patients and Methods
A total of 45 serial CSF samples were collected from 16 patients, 8 of these with confirmed LMM. Of those with LMM, 7 had poor survival (<4 months) and one was an extraordinary responder (still alive with survival >35 months). CSF samples were analyzed by mass spectrometry and incubated with melanoma cells, that were subjected to RNA-Seq analysis. Functional assays were performed to validate the pathways identified.
Results
Mass spectrometry analyses showed the CSF of most LMM patients to be enriched for pathways involved in innate immunity, protease-mediated damage, and IGF-related signaling. All of these were anti-correlated in the extraordinary responder. RNA-Seq analysis showed CSF to induce PI3K/AKT, integrin, B-cell activation, S-phase entry, TNFR2, TGF-β and oxidative stress responses in the melanoma cells. ELISA assays confirmed that TGF-β expression increased in the CSF of patients progressing with LMM. CSF from poorly responding patients conferred tolerance to BRAF inhibitor therapy in apoptosis assays.
Conclusions
These analyses identified proteomic/transcriptional signatures in the CSF of patients who succumbed to LMM. We further showed that the CSF from LMM patients has the potential to modulate BRAF inhibitor responses and may contribute to drug resistance.
METHODS:
Materials and Methods
Patient specimens and cell lines
Forty-five human CSF specimens from 16 patients were procured under written informed consent in accordance with the Belmont Report and the Declaration of Helsinki. The sample collection protocol was approved by the University of South Florida Institutional Review Board (MCC numbers 50103, 50172 and 19332). Upon draw, samples were immediately placed on ice and transferred for processing. Fluid was separated from any cellular material using centrifugation and used for further analysis. Tissues collected from one LMM patient at autopsy were also procured under a written informed consent protocol approved by the University of South Florida Institutional Review Board (MCC number 18987) in accordance with the Belmont Report and the Declaration of Helsinki. The WM164, 451Lu and WM983A melanoma cells lines were a kind gift from Dr. Meenhard Herlyn (The Wistar Institute, Philadelphia, PA). A375 cell line was purchased from ATCC (Manassas, VA). All cells were tested for mycoplasma contamination every 3 months using the Plasmotest-Mycoplasma Detection Test (Invivogen, San Diego, CA). Last test date: 09/16/19. Each cell line was authenticated using the Human STR cell line authentication service (ATCC). All cell lines are discarded 15 passages from authentication or thaw.
CSF Proteomics
The CSF samples were concentrated using Amicon Ultra membrane filter with 3kDa molecular weight cutoff (Millipore), followed by depletion of the Top 12 abundant serum proteins using spin columns (Pierce). The flow through was reduced, alkylated and digested with trypsin. Tryptic peptides (10 μg) were labeled with TMT-6plex reagents (Thermo). After quality control, pooled TMT labeled samples were then separated via basic pH RPLC fractionation into final 24 concatenated fractions. Each of the fractions was then run using 90 min LC-MS/MS with a 90 minute gradient (RSLC nano and QExactive Plus mass spectrometer, Thermo). Sequence assignment and quantitation was performed using the MaxQuant. The TMT experimental design is presented in Supplemental Table 1. The identical reference pool assayed in each multiplex was used for both within-plex and between-plex normalization. First, samples within each multiplex were normalized with interactive rank order normalization or IRON (iron generic –proteomics) against the reference pool. Then, to correct for between-plex differences in expression, abundances within each multiplex were converted to log2 ratios against its reference pool. Separately, unnormalized versions of all reference pools were normalized together using IRON, and the geometric mean abundance stored for each row of data. The log2 ratios were then scaled back into abundance values using the stored row means. The normalized data was then transformed into log2 abundances prior to additional analyses. Proteins in non-responder LMM patients that were both correlated with time and anti-correlated with the single LMM responder patient were used for pathway enrichment, heat map visualization, and literature network generation. See supplemental methods for more details. The mass spectrometry proteomics data have been deposited to the ProteomeXchange Consortium via the PRIDE partner repository with the dataset identifier PXD016002 and 10.6019/PXD016002.
RNA-seq
WM164 cells were plated in a 6-well plate at 200,000 cells/well and allowed to attach overnight in normal culture media. Next day, the media was replaced to serum-free RPMI and cells were incubated overnight. Cells were treated with 3μM vemurafenib or vehicle control in 5% FBS/RPMI, or a 1:1 mixture of serum-free media:CSF from patient 1, patient 2 or patient 3 for 8 hours. RNA was extracted using Qiagen’s RNeasy Kit, with on-column DNase digestion (Hilden, Germany). RNA samples were reviewed for quality on the Agilent TapeStation followed by quantitation using the Qubit fluorometric assay. RNAseq libraries were processed using the Ovation Human FFPE RNA-Seq Multiplex System (NuGEN Technologies, San Carlos, CA). Briefly, 100 ng of RNA was used to generate cDNA and a strand-specific library following the manufacturer’s protocol. BioAnalyzer library size assessment and the Kapa Library Quantification Kit were used for library quantification. The libraries were sequenced on the Illumina NextSeq 500 v2 sequencer with two 75-base paired-end runs in order to generate 25–35 million read pairs per sample.
Sequencing reads were subjected to a variety of pre- and post-alignment QC measures before mapped against the hg19 reference genome using TopHat 2.0.13. Gene-level quantification was determined using HTSeq 0.6.1 by summation of raw counts of reads aligned to the region associated with each gene. Normalization and differential expression analysis were performed using R/Bioconductor package DESeq2_1.6.3. Benjamini-Hochberg correction was used to adjust p-values to account for multiple comparisons. An adjusted p-value less than 0.05, and/or a fold change of 2 or above was used as a criteria to determine differentially expressed genes (unless otherwise stated). The pathway activation analyses were generated through the use of IPA (QIAGEN Inc., https://www.qiagenbio-informatics.com/products/ingenuity-pathway-analysis). Data are available in GEO (GSE 141021).
Apoptosis Assays
WM164 cells were plated in a 6-well plate at 200,000 cells/well and allowed to attach overnight in normal culture media. Next day, the media was replaced to serum-free RPMI and cells were incubated overnight. Then the cells were treated with 3μM vemurafenib or vehicle control in 5% FBS/RPMI, or a 1:1 mixture of serum-free media:CSF for 72 hours. Cells were stained for Annexin-V and TMRM (tetramethylrhodamine methyl ester), as described previously.
Kinase Assay
WM164 cell line was incubated with serum-free RPMI media +/− patient 9 CSF (1:1 ratio media:CSF). Phosphorylation levels of forty-three human kinases were determined using the Proteome Profiler Human Phospho-Kinase Array Kit (R&D Systems, Minneapolis, MN, Supplemental Table 2).
Western Blot Analysis
Proteins were extracted and Western Blotting was performed as described. The antibodies to pAKT S473, total AKT, pERK, total ERK, and TGF-β were from Cell Signaling Technology (Beverly, MA) and GAPDH was from Sigma (St Louis, MO).
Immunohistochemistry
Formalin-fixed paraffin embedded tissue sections were evaluated for TGF-β and PTEN expression via IHC with optimized anti-TGF-β (Santa Cruz Biotechnologies, Dallas, TX) and anti-PTEN (Spring Bioscience, Pleasanton, CA) antibodies in the Tissue Core at Moffitt Cancer Center. TMA was stained using a Ventana Discovery XT automated system (Ventana Medical Systems, Tucson, AZ) following manufacturer’s protocol with proprietary reagents. Slides were imaged with an Aperio AT2 slide scanner (Leica Biosystems Inc., Illinois, USA) with a 20X/0.7NA lens. Visiopharm Image Analysis Software (Visiopharm, Hoersholm, Denmark) was used to score staining intensity. The amount of positive pixel staining in tumor and non-tumor areas was measured for each marker using simple threshold segmentation. The threshold for positivity was determined independently for each marker based on the dye used and background staining patterns.
ELISA
The TGF-β1 ELISA Kit was purchased from R&D Systems (Minneapolis, MN) and used according to the manufacturer’s protocol.
Colony Formation Assay
Briefly, 1 × 104 cells/well were plated in six-well plates and allowed to attach overnight. Cells were then treated with vehicle or 3 μM vemurafenib in the presence of absence of exogenous TGF-β1 (R&D Systems, Minneapolis, MN). Cells were left to grow for 2 weeks with a bi-weekly media/drug/ligand renewal. Wells were washed with PBS and stained with crystal violet solution (50% methanol + 50% H2O + 0.5% crystal violet).
Statistical Analysis
Results are reported as mean values, error bars indicating ±SEM. GraphPad Prism 6 software was used to calculate statistical significance of magnitude of changes between different conditions using the parametric paired t-test (except for proteomic or RNAseq data, for which analysis is described above).