ABSTRACT:
SARS-CoV-2 infections are rapidly spreading around the globe. The rapid development of therapies is of major importance. However, our lack of understanding of the molecular processes and host cell signaling events underlying SARS-CoV-2 infection hinders therapy development. We use a SARS-CoV-2 infection system in permissible human cells to study signaling changes by phosphoproteomics. We identify viral protein phosphorylation and define phosphorylation-driven host cell signaling changes upon infection. Growth factor receptor (GFR) signaling and downstream pathways are activated. Drug-protein network analyses revealed GFR signaling as key pathways targetable by approved drugs. The inhibition of GFR downstream signaling by five compounds prevents SARS-CoV-2 replication in cells, assessed by cytopathic effect, viral dsRNA production, and viral RNA release into the supernatant. This study describes host cell signaling events upon SARS-CoV-2 infection and reveals GFR signaling as a central pathway essential for SARS-CoV-2 replication. It provides novel strategies for COVID-19 treatment.
Graphical Abstract
Highlights
Phosphoproteomics of SARS-CoV-2-infected cells reveal the signaling landscape
SARS-CoV-2 proteins are extensively phosphorylated in host cells
Infection leads to the activation of growth factor receptor signaling
Drugs inhibiting growth factor receptor signaling prevent viral replication
In this study, Klann et al. dissected the host cell signaling landscape upon infection with SARS-CoV-2. Mapping differential signaling networks identified a number of pathways activated during infection. Drug-target network analysis revealed potential therapeutic targets. Growth factor receptor signaling was highly activated upon infection and its inhibition prevented SARS-CoV-2 replication in cells.
METHODS:
STAR★Methods
Key Resources Table
Resource Availability
Lead Contact
Further information and requests for resources and reagents should be directed to and will be fulfilled by the lead contact: Christian Münch: ch.muench@em.uni-frankfurt.de.
Materials Availability
UKF-RC-2 human kidney cells derived from renal carcinoma are available upon request.
Data and Code Availability
The mass spectrometry proteomics data have been deposited to the ProteomeXchange Consortium via the PRIDE partner repository with the dataset identifiers PRIDE: PXD018357.
Experimental Model and Subject Details
Cell culture
Human Caco-2 cells, derived from colon carcinoma, was obtained from the Deutsche Sammlung von Mikroorganismen und Zellkulturen (DSMZ; Braunschweig, Germany). Cells were grown at 37°C in Minimal Essential Medium (MEM) supplemented with 10% fetal bovine serum (FBS) and containing 100 IU/ml penicillin and 100 μg/ml streptomycin. All culture reagents were purchased from Sigma.
Cell line designated UKF-RC-2 was established from a tumor sample of a patient with a diagnosis of renal carcinoma hospitalized at Department of Urology, University Hospital Frankfurt. Tumor tissue was cut in pieces and dissociated using 0.2% trypsin solution. Primary tumor cells and passaging of cell line was performed using IMDM medium supplemented with 10% FCS and antibiotics. UKF-RC-2 cells between passages 15 and 20 were used for antiviral experiments. All culture reagents were purchased from Sigma.
Virus preparation
SARS-CoV-2 was isolated from samples of travelers returning from Wuhan (China) to Frankfurt (Germany) using human colon carcinoma cell line CaCo-2 as described previously12. SARS-CoV-2 stocks used in the experiments had undergone one passage on CaCo-2 cells and were stored at –80°C. Virus titers were determined as TCID50/ml in confluent cells in 96-well microtiter plates.
Method Details
Antiviral and cell viability assays
Confluent layers of CaCo-2 cells in 96-well plates were infected with SARS-CoV-2 at MOI 0.01. Virus was added together with drugs and incubated in MEM supplemented with 2% FBS with different drug dilutions. Cytopathogenic effect (CPE) was assessed visually 48 h after infection. To assess effects of drugs on Caco-2 cell viability, confluent cell layers were treated with different drug concentration in 96-well plates. The viability was measured using the Rotitest Vital (Roth) according to manufacturer’s instructions. Data for each condition was collected for at least three biological replicates. For dose response curves, data was fitted with all replicates using OriginPro 2020 with the following equation:IC50 values were generated by OriginPro 2020 together with metrics for curve fits.
For UKF-RC-2 cells, the assay was performed as described above, except for usage of a MOI of 0.1 as staining experiments for SARS-CoV-2 infection in UKF-RC-2 cells revealed the need of a higher MOI to achieve comparable effects to CaCo-2 cells.
Quantification of viral RNA
SARS-CoV-2 RNA from cell culture supernatant samples was isolated using AVL buffer and the QIAamp Viral RNA Kit (QIAGEN) according to the manufacturer’s instructions. Absorbance-based quantification of the RNA yield was performed using the Genesys 10S UV-Vis Spectrophotometer (Thermo Scientific). RNA was subjected to OneStep qRT-PCR analysis using the Luna Universal One-Step RT-qPCR Kit (New England Biolabs) and a CFX96 Real-Time System, C1000 Touch Thermal Cycler. Primers were adapted from the WHO protocol targeting the open reading frame for RNA-dependent RNA polymerase (RdRp): RdRP_SARSr-F2 (GTG ARA TGG TCA TGT GTG GCG G) and RdRP_SARSr-R1 (CAR ATG TTA AAS ACA CTA TTA GCA TA) using 0.4 μM per reaction. Standard curves were created using plasmid DNA (pEX-A128-RdRP) harboring the corresponding amplicon regions for RdRP target sequence according to GenBank Accession number NC_045512. All quantification experiments have been carried out with biological replicates.
Detection of viral load by microscopy
Effect of selected compounds on viral replication was assessed by staining of double-stranded RNA, which has been shown to be sufficient for measurement of SARS-CoV-1 replication. Briefly, cells were fixed with acetone/methanol (40:60) solution 48 h post infection. Immunostaining was performed using a monoclonal antibody directed against dsRNA (1:150 dilution, SCICONS J2, mouse, IgG2a, kappa chain, English & Scientific Consulting Kft., Szirák, Hungary), which was detected with biotin-conjugated secondary antibody (1:1000 dilution, Jackson ImmunoResearch) followed by application streptavidin, peroxidase conjugate (1:3000 dilution, Sigma Aldrich). Lastly, the dsRNA positive cells were visualized by addition of AEC substrate. Wells were imaged at different areas to visualize a larger area (presented in Supplementary figures).
Sample preparation for mass spectrometry
For all proteomics analysis, Caco-2 cells were infected at an MOI of 1 and the sample preparation was performed as described previously. Briefly, lysates were precipitated by methanol/chloroform and proteins resuspended in 8 M Urea/10 mM EPPS pH 8.2. Concentration of proteins was determined by Bradford assay and 300 μg of protein per samples was used for digestion. For digestion, the samples were diluted to 1 M Urea with 10mM EPPS pH 8.2 and incubated overnight with 1:50 LysC (Wako Chemicals) and 1:100 Sequencing grade trypsin (Promega). Digests were acidified using TFA and tryptic peptideswere purified by tC18 SepPak (50 mg, Waters). 125 μg peptides per sample were TMT labeled and the mixing was normalized after a single injection measurement by LC-MS/MS to equimolar ratios for each channel. 250 μg of pooled peptides were dried for offline High pH Reverse phase fractionation by HPLC (whole cell proteome) and remaining 1 mg of multiplexed peptides were used for phospho-peptide enrichment by High-Select Fe-NTA Phosphopeptide enrichment kit (Thermo Fisher) after manufacturer`s instructions. After enrichment, peptides were dried and resuspended in 70% acetonitrile/0.1% TFA and filtered through a C8 stage tip to remove contaminating Fe-NTA particles. Dried phospho-peptides then were fractionated on C18 (Empore) stage-tip. For fractionation C18 stagetips were washed with 100% acetonitrile twice, followed by equilibration with 0.1% TFA solution. Peptides were loaded in 0.1% TFA solution and washed with water. Elution was performed stepwise with different acetonitrile concentrations in 0.1% Triethylamine solution (5%, 7.5%, 10%, 12.5%, 15%, 17.5%, 20%, 50%). The eight fractions were concatenated into four fractions and dried for LC-MS.
Offline high pH reverse phase fractionation
Peptides were fractionated using a Dionex Ultimate 3000 analytical HPLC. 250 μg of pooled and purified TMT-labeled samples were resuspended in 10 mM ammonium-bicarbonate (ABC), 5% ACN, and separated on a 250 mm long C18 column (X-Bridge, 4.6 mm ID, 3.5 μm particle size; Waters) using a multistep gradient from 100% Solvent A (5% ACN, 10 mM ABC in water) to 60% Solvent B (90% ACN, 10 mM ABC in water) over 70 min. Eluting peptides were collected every 45 s into a total of 96 fractions, which were cross-concatenated into 24 fractions and dried for further processing.
Liquid chromatography mass spectrometry
All mass spectrometry data was acquired in centroid mode on an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos mass spectrometer hyphenated to an easy-nLC 1200 nano HPLC system using a nanoFlex ion source (ThermoFisher Scientific) applying a spray voltage of 2.6 kV with the transfer tube heated to 300°C and a funnel RF of 30%. Internal mass calibration was enabled (lock mass 445.12003 m/z). Peptides were separated on a self-made, 32 cm long, 75μm ID fused-silica column, packed in house with 1.9 μm C18 particles (ReproSil-Pur, Dr. Maisch) and heated to 50°C using an integrated column oven (Sonation). HPLC solvents consisted of 0.1% Formic acid in water (Buffer A) and 0.1% Formic acid, 80% acetonitrile in water (Buffer B).
For total proteome analysis, a synchronous precursor selection (SPS) multi-notch MS3 method was used in order to minimize ratio compression as previously described. Individual peptide fractions were eluted by a non-linear gradient from 7 to 40% B over 90 minutes followed by a stepwise increase to 95% B in 6 minutes which was held for another 9 minutes. Full scan MS spectra (350-1400 m/z) were acquired with a resolution of 120,000 at m/z 200, maximum injection time of 100 ms and AGC target value of 4 × 105. The 20 most intense precursors with a charge state between 2 and 6 per full scan were selected for fragmentation (“Top 20”) and isolated with a quadrupole isolation window of 0.7 Th. MS2 scans were performed in the Ion trap (Turbo) using a maximum injection time of 50ms, AGC target value of 1.5 × 104 and fragmented using CID with a normalized collision energy (NCE) of 35%. SPS-MS3 scans for quantification were performed on the 10 most intense MS2 fragment ions with an isolation window of 0.7 Th (MS) and 2 m/z (MS2). Ions were fragmented using HCD with an NCE of 65% and analyzed in the Orbitrap with a resolution of 50,000 at m/z 200, scan range of 110-500 m/z, AGC target value of 1.5 x105 and a maximum injection time of 120ms. Repeated sequencing of already acquired precursors was limited by setting a dynamic exclusion of 45 s and 7 ppm and advanced peak determination was deactivated.
For phosphopeptide analysis, each peptide fraction was eluted by a linear gradient from 5 to 32% B over 120 minutes followed by a stepwise increase to 95% B in 8 minutes which was held for another 7 minutes. Full scan MS spectra (350-1400 m/z) were acquired with a resolution of 120,000 at m/z 200, maximum injection time of 100 ms and AGC target value of 4 × 105. The 20 most intense precursors per full scan with a charge state between 2 and 5 were selected for fragmentation (“Top 20”), isolated with a quadrupole isolation window of 0.7 Th and fragmented via HCD applying an NCE of 38%. MS2 scans were performed in the Orbitrap using a resolution of 50,000 at m/z 200, maximum injection time of 86ms and AGC target value of 1 × 105. Repeated sequencing of already acquired precursors was limited by setting a dynamic exclusion of 60 s and 7 ppm and advanced peak determination was deactivated. An MS2 based method was chosen, because of higher precision and identification rates. Phospho-peptide fractions intrinsically exhibit lower complexity, rendering them less prone to ratio compression by isolation interference.
Mass spectrometry data analysis
Raw files were analyzed using Proteome Discoverer (PD) 2.4 software (ThermoFisher Scientific). Spectra were selected using default settings and database searches performed using SequestHT node in PD. Database searches were performed against trypsin digested Homo sapiens SwissProt database, SARS-CoV-2 database (Uniprot pre-release). Static modifications were set as TMT6 at the N terminus and lysines and carbamidomethyl at cysteine residues. Search was performed using Sequest HT taking the following dynamic modifications into account: Oxidation (M), Phospho (S, T, Y), Met-loss (Protein N terminus), Acetyl (Protein N terminus) and Met-loss acetyl (Protein N terminus). For whole cell proteomics, the same settings were used except phosphorylation was not allowed as dynamic modification. For phospho-proteomics all peptide groups were normalized by summed intensity normalization and then analyzed on peptide level. For whole cell proteomics normalized PSMs were summed for each accession and data exported for further use. Peptide and protein identifications were validated using a concatenated target-decoy strategy and FDR was estimated using q-values calculated by Percolator applying 1% and 5% cut-offs for high and medium confidence hits, while only high confident proteins are reported. Phosphosite localization probabilities were calculated using the ptmRS-node working in “PhosphoRS mode” and using default settings.
Quantification and Statistical Analysis
Significance testing
Unless otherwise stated significance was tested by unpaired, two-sided Student’s t tests with equal variance assumed. Resulting P values were corrected using the Benjamini-Hochberg FDR procedure. Adjusted P values smaller/equal 0.05 were considered significant. For phospho-proteomics an additional fold change cutoff was applied (log2 > |1|), while for total protein levels, due to different dynamic range, a fold change cutoff of log 2 > |0.5| was applied.
Prediction of kinase motifs
Kinase motifs of phosphopeptides from SARS-CoV-2 proteins were predicted using NetPhos 3.1 and GPS 5.0 (stand-alone version) using the fasta-file of the Uniprot pre-release which was also used for the proteomics data analysis.. For NetPhos, only Kinases with a score above 0.5 were considered as positive hits. For GPS 5.0, sequences were submitted separately for S/T- and Y-kinases and the score threshold was set to “high.” For the final list in Table S3, only the top hits with the highest scores were considered.
Protein co-regulation analysis
Z-scores were calculated for each phospho-site and the total protein levels individually. Phosphosites were collapsed by average. For merging phosphorylation and total protein levels Z-scores for collapsed phosphorylation and protein level were added for each condition and replicate. Thus, both negative Z-scores (downregulation) will produce a lower combined Z-score and vice versa two positive Z-scores will produce a larger combined Z-score. Next, Euclidean distance correlation for all possible protein-protein pairs were calculated, taking all conditions and replicates individually into account. A heatmap was then build by Euclidean distance hierarchical clustering of the correlation matrix.
Pathway enrichment analysis
Pathway enrichment analysis was performed by ReactomeFI cytoscape plugin or by STRING functional enrichment analysis. Both analysis used Reactome database for pathway annotations.
Drug-target network analysis
All proteins were loaded into ReactomeFI cytoscape plugin to visualize protein-protein functional interaction network. Next, drugs were overlaid by ReactomeFI and network was filtered for the drugs and the first interacting partners. Layout was calculated by yFilesLayout algorithm.
Interaction network analysis
All proteins showing significant regulation were loaded by OmicsVisualizer cytoscape plugin and STRING interaction network was retrieved with a confidence cutoff of 0.9. For EGFR subnetwork, EGFR was selected with first interacting neighbors.