ABSTRACT:
Extracellular vesicles (EVs), e.g., exosomes and microvesicles, are one of the main networks of intercellular communication. In myeloproliferative neoplasms, such as polycythemia vera (PV), excess of EVs originating from overabundant blood cells can directly contribute to thrombosis through their procoagulant activity. However, the proteomic composition of these vesicles in PV patients has not been investigated before. In this work, we examined the proteomic composition of serum EVs of PV patients in comparison to healthy controls. We processed EV-enriched serum samples using the Multiple Enzyme Filter Aided Sample Preparation approach (MED-FASP), conducted LC-MS/MS measurements on a Q-Exactive HF-X mass spectrometer, and quantitatively analyzed the absolute concentrations of identified proteins by the Total Protein Approach (TPA). Thirty-eight proteins were present at statistically significant different concentrations between PV patients’ study group and healthy controls’ group. The main protein components deregulated in PV were primarily related to excessive amounts of cells, increased platelet activation, elevated immune and inflammatory response, and high concentrations of procoagulant and angiogenic agents. Our study provides the first quantitative analysis of the serum EVs’ proteome in PV patients. This new knowledge may contribute to a better understanding of the secondary systemic effects of PV disease and further development of diagnostic or therapeutic procedures.
METHODS:
2. Materials and Methods 
2.1. Blood Collection and Serum Isolation
Blood samples were collected into the 8.5 mL BD Vacutainer™ Venous Blood Collection Tubes: SST™ Serum Separation Tubes. In total, 18 samples were collected: Nine from patients diagnosed with polycythemia vera (diagnosed by WHO 2016 criteria) and nine control samples from healthy donors. All patients were on phlebotomy and aspirin treatment. Each donor gave written consent regarding the use of collected material in translational studies and the publication of obtained results. Examination of patient blood samples had been approved by Ludwig-Maximilians-Universität ethics committee. Leukocyte, platelet, and cholesterol blood concentrations of patients taking part in the study are listed in Supplementary Table S1a. Blood samples were allowed to clot at room temperature for 30 min after collection. The serum was separated from the clot by centrifugation at room temperature for 10 min at 2000 g. Then, the serum was transferred into a new tube, frozen by liquid nitrogen and stored in −80 °C until EV extraction.
2.2. Extracellular Vesicle Isolation
EVs were isolated from the blood serum using the Total Exosome Isolation (from serum) reagent (Invitrogen) according to the manufacturer’s procedure (Figure 1a). Samples were thawed at room temperature and centrifuged at 2000 g for 30 min to remove cells and debris. Supernatant containing the clarified serum was transferred to new tubes and placed on ice prior to the procedure. Briefly, 500 µL of serum was mixed with 100 µL of reagent and incubated at 4 °C for 30 min. Afterwards, samples were centrifuged at 10,000 g for 10 min at room temperature. Supernatant was discarded, and the pellet containing EVs was dissolved in 100 µL of PBS buffer. A 1% SDS buffer (100 mM Tris-HCl pH 8, 50 mM DTT, 1% SDS) was used at the ratio of 1:5 (EVs: buffer) for 10 min at 95 °C to lyse obtained EVs and reduce disulfide bonds of released proteins. Lysed EVs were frozen by liquid nitrogen and stored at −20 °C until further processing.
2.3. Protein Digestion
Samples containing lysed EVs were subjected to digestion by the MED-FASP (Multi-Enzyme Digestion Filter Aided Sample Preparation) procedure (Figure 1b). Total protein concentration was measured using the tryptophan fluorescence-based (WF) assay (see Supplementary Table S1b), and 100 µg of total protein was transferred to Microcon 30 kDa filters (Merck). 200 µl of the UA buffer (8 M urea in 100 mM Tris-HCl pH 8.5) was added to samples onto filters and the filters were centrifuged at 10,000 g for 20 min at room temperature. This procedure was repeated two times. Cysteine alkylation was performed by the incubation of samples in darkness at room temperature for 20 min with 100 µL of 55 mM iodoacetamide solution in the UA buffer followed by centrifugation at 10,000 g for 15 min at room temperature. Afterwards, samples were washed three times with 100 µL of the UA buffer and two times with 100 µL of the digestion buffer (50 mM Tris-HCl) by centrifugation in the same conditions. Three consecutive protein digestions with different enzymes were conducted on filters. First, proteins were digested overnight with LysC at 1:50 enzyme to protein ratio in the digestion buffer. Peptides were then eluted by centrifugation at 10,000 g for 15 min at room temperature, followed by two washes with 125 µL and 100 µL of the digestion buffer. Afterwards, filters were placed in new tubes and samples were subjected to digestion by trypsin overnight at 1:100 enzyme to protein ratio in the digestion buffer. Peptides were eluted the same way as it was described for the LysC digestion. After placing filters in new tubes, samples were digested by chymotrypsin for three hours at 1:100 enzyme to protein ratio in 10 mM CaCl2 in 100 mM Tris-HCl pH 7.8. Peptides were eluted by the digestion buffer as described before. All enzymatic digestion reactions were conducted at 37 °C. The peptide concentration was measured by the WF assay. Aliquots containing 10 µg of peptides resulting from each digestion of every sample were separately subjected to STAGE (STop And Go Extraction) TIPS procedure using Empore C18 extraction disks (3M) with elution by 60% acetonitrile/1% acetic acid solution. Samples were concentrated to 5 µL volume in SpeedVac and stored at −20 °C until the MS analysis.
2.4. Mass spectra Acquisition and Data Analysis
Liquid chromatography–tandem mass spectrometry measurements of prepared samples were performed using a QExactive HF-X mass spectrometer (ThermoFisher Scientific, Palo Alto, CA, USA) operating in data-dependent acquisition mode, coupled with nanoLC. The raw spectra of all samples were loaded into the MaxQuant software and searched together against the Homo sapiens UniProtKB database (June 2016). Peptides were chromatographed on a 50 cm column with 75 µm inner diameter packed C18 material. Peptide separation was carried out at 300 nL/min for 95 min using an acetonitrile gradient of 5–30%. The temperature of the column oven was 55 °C. The mass spectrometer operated in data-dependent mode with survey scans acquired at a resolution of 60,000. Up to the top 15 most abundant isotope patterns with charge ≥ +2 from the survey scan (300–1650 m/z) were selected with an isolation window of 1.4 m/z and fragmented by HCD with normalized collision energies of 25. The maximum ion injection times for the survey scan and the MS/MS scans were 20 and 28 ms, respectively. The ion target value for MS1 and MS2 scan modes was set to 3 × 106 and 105, respectively. The dynamic exclusion time was 30 s. Carbamidomethylation was set as a fixed modification, a maximum of two missed cleavages were allowed, and maximum false discovery rate for peptides and proteins was set at 0.01. Quantification of protein concentrations was conducted using the Total Protein Approach and Max Quant LFQ algorithm. The calculations were performed in Microsoft Excel. Statistical analysis of protein concentrations differing PV patients’ group and healthy controls’ group was conducted in the Perseus software using the PCA analysis and student t-test. The functional gene enrichment analysis and Vesiclepedia database search was performed in the FunRich software using built in FunRich database. The protein interaction analysis was performed in the STRING database. The mass spectrometry proteomics data have been deposited to the ProteomeXchange Consortium via the PRIDE partner repository with the dataset identifier PXD013234.