ABSTRACT:
Cyclic AMP (cAMP) is an important signalling molecule across evolution, but its role in malaria parasites is poorly understood. We have investigated the role of cAMP in asexual blood stage development of Plasmodium falciparum through conditional disruption of adenylyl cyclase beta (ACβ) and its downstream effector, cAMP-dependent protein kinase (PKA). We show that both production of cAMP and activity of PKA are critical for erythrocyte invasion, whilst key developmental steps that precede invasion still take place in the absence of cAMP-dependent signalling. We also show that another parasite protein with putative cyclic nucleotide binding sites, Plasmodium falciparum EPAC (PfEpac), does not play an essential role in blood stages. We identify and quantify numerous sites, phosphorylation of which is dependent on cAMP signalling, and we provide mechanistic insight as to how cAMP-dependent phosphorylation of the cytoplasmic domain of the essential invasion adhesin apical membrane antigen 1 (AMA1) regulates erythrocyte invasion.
Conditional gene knockout shows that cyclic AMP signalling is absolutely required for invasion of erythrocytes by malaria parasites. Quantitative mass spectrometry identifies the parasite proteins whose phosphorylation is adversely affected when cyclic AMP signalling is ablated.
METHODS:
Methods
P. falciparum culture and synchronisation
P. falciparum erythrocytic stages were cultured in human erythrocytes (National Blood Transfusion Service, UK) and RPMI 1640 medium (Life Technologies) supplemented with 0.5% Albumax type II (Gibco), 50 μM hypoxanthine, and 2 mM L-glutamine. Synchronous parasite cultures were obtained as described previously. Briefly, segmented schizonts were enriched by centrifugation on a 70% Percoll (GE Healthcare) cushion, followed by the addition of fresh erythrocytes to allow invasion for 1–2 h under continuously shaking conditions. Residual intact schizonts were then removed by a further cycle of Percoll treatment and the resulting pellet treated with sorbitol to yield highly synchronous ring-stage cultures. In all cases, induction of DiCre activity when required was by treatment for 2–4 h with 100 nM RAP (Sigma) as described previously. Control parasites were treated with vehicle only (1% v/v DMSO).
Genetic modification of P. falciparum parasites
The ACβ-HA:loxP parasite line was generated by Cas9-mediated genome editing of the DiCre-expressing B11 P. falciparum clone, as described previously. A C-terminal triple-HA tag and loxP site were added to the ACβ gene using a repair template containing a 5′ homology arm containing 840 bp of sequence from the 3′ end of ACβ exon 3, a 480-bp re-codonised region corresponding to the sequences of exons 4 and 5, triple-HA and loxP sequences, and an 846-bp 3′ homology arm derived from the ACβ 3′UTR. This repair template was synthesised commercially (Geneart; Thermo), linearised immediately upstream of the 5′ homology region by digestion with SpeI, and transfected in conjunction with a pDC2-based plasmid encoding Cas9 and a single guide RNA (sgRNA) targeted to ATTGCATGTCCCTAATCGAT at the 5′ end of the fourth exon. Clones expressing HA-tagged ACβ were isolated by limiting dilution and subsequently transfected to replace the second intron of the modified ACβ gene with a loxP-containing SERA2 intron (SERA2loxPint), again using the Cas9 system. The repair construct for this modification step comprised the SERA2loxPint module followed by 300 bp of re-codonised sequence corresponding to the 5′ end of exon 3 and was flanked by approximately 500 bp homology regions. This repair template was linearised in the same manner using a SpeI site upstream of the 5′ homology region. The corresponding sgRNA was targeted to GAGACGCCGTTCTTGTTATA at the 5′ end of exon 3. Doubly modified clones were obtained by limiting dilution and confirmed by diagnostic PCR and capillary sequencing.
The PKAc-HA:loxP line was generated from the DiCre-expressing 3D7 P. falciparum clone using SLI of a plasmid based on pL7 (a kind gift from Kathrin Witmer, Imperial College London), in which the yFCU expression cassette of pL6 had been deleted. The gRNA cassette from pL7 was removed and replaced with a synthetic cassette containing a SERA2loxPint followed by a triple-HA tag and downstream loxP, glucosamine-6-phosphate riboswitch ribozyme (glmS), and PbDT 3′UTR sequences (IDT). A fragment containing a thosea asigna virus 2A peptide (T2A) ribosomal skip peptide and NeoR cassette was amplified from a pSLI-sandwich plasmid and cloned downstream of the C-terminal triple HA. A re-codonised version of PKAc exons 4 and 5 was synthesised commercially (IDT) and inserted downstream of the SERA2loxPint and upstream of the 3×HA tag. An 800-bp 5′ homology region comprising exon 2, intron 2, and exon 3 of the endogenous PKAc locus was cloned upstream of the SERA2loxPint. Following transfection of purified schizonts using an AMAXA nucleofector 4D (Lonza) and P3 reagent, modified parasites were selected as described previously and cloned by limiting dilution.
The PKAc-HA:loxP line was further modified to produce the complemented PKAc-HA_DDDcomp:loxP line. A plasmid based on a custom DiCre-inducible expression vector (pDCIn) was used to integrate sequence encoding a RAP-inducible, triple-HA tagged PKAc fused to a DDD into the p230p locus using Cas9-mediated gene editing with a gRNA previously reported for this locus. pDCIn was generated by modifying pBCam by several cloning steps using the NEBuilder Gibson assembly. First, an eGFP gene was amplified with a T2A peptide in the frame, with the C terminus and a MluI restriction site followed by loxP site preceding the eGFP coding sequence. This was cloned in frame with the BSD gene from pBCam using a BstBI site. The Cam promoter was excised using PstI and SalI sites and a second loxP site preceded by a multiple cloning site inserted upstream of the Hrp2 3′UTR. The 800-bp homology regions for the p230p locus were inserted using a SmaI site for the 5′ homology region and an EcoRI site for the 3′ homology region. This yielded pDCIn (DiCre induction). To modify this to suit PKAc complementation, a 2-kbp region of the PKAc 5′UTR was cloned into the plasmid upstream of the GFP T2A BSD cassette using MluI and SmaI sites. Finally, a synthetic DNA fragment consisting of a re-codonised PKAc coding sequence followed by triple-HA and DDD sequences (IDT) was inserted downstream of an EGFP T2A BSDR expression cassette (driven by the cloned PKAc 5′UTR) and a second loxP site using NotI and KpnI sites. This plasmid (10 μg) was linearised by digestion with AatII close to the ampR cassette and co-transfected together with the pDC2p230p Cas9/sgRNA-containing plasmid (50 μg) into PKAc-HA:loxP parasites, as previously described. The transfected culture was treated with 5 μg/mL BSD (Sigma) (3 d post-transfection to select for integration. EGFP-positive parasites, indicative of successful integration of the construct, were observed by live microscopy (S1C Fig), and BSD selection was continued until no WT p230p locus could be detected by PCR. Upon treatment with RAP, parasites were expected to switch from expressing EGFP and BSD from the p230p locus and PKAc-HA3 from the PKAc locus to expressing PKAc-HA3-DDD from the p230p locus and a truncated, untagged N-terminal fragment of PKAc from the PKAc locus. These transitions were verified by live fluorescence microscopy and western blotting, which showed a switch in molecular mass of the HA-positive band from approximately 50 kDa (the mass of PKAc-HA3 expressed from the PKAc locus) to approximately 61 kDa (the approximate mass for PKAc-HA3-DDD) in the presence of 10 μM TMP, which is required to stabilise PKAc-HA3-DDD. The PfEPAC knockout plasmid was constructed by cloning the first 800-bp homology region EPAC coding sequence into the pSLI DiCre plasmid in frame with the downstream T2A NeoR cassette (Fig 4D). Following transfection of purified schizonts using an AMAXA nucleofector 4D (Lonza) and P3 reagent, modified parasites were selected as described previously, applying G418 selection until no WT parasites were detected by PCR. All plasmid sequences were verified by capillary sequencing, and all RAP treatments were performed on ring-stage parasites.
Oligonucleotide primers used in diagnostic PCR to detect integration and excision of transgenes, and the sequences of re-codonised regions, are provided below in Tables 2 and 3.
Parasite sample preparation and western blot
Parasite culture supernatant samples for egress and adhesin shedding assays were prepared from tightly synchronised cultures. Percoll-enriched mature schizonts were resuspended in complete medium containing the PKG inhibitor 4-[7-[(dimethylamino)methyl]-2-(4-fluorphenyl)imidazo[1,2-α]pyridine-3-yl]pyrimidin-2-amine (compound 2 or C2; 1.5 μM) and allowed to further mature for 3 h until predominantly mature segmented schizonts. Schizonts were then pelleted by centrifugation at 800g, washed to remove the PKG inhibitor, and suspended at a 10% haematocrit in fresh warm medium. Aliquots (100 μL) were harvested at specified time points; schizonts were pelleted by centrifugation and culture supernatants collected and clarified using 0.22-μm Costar Spin-X centrifuge filters (Corning). The schizont pellet from t = 0 was retained as a pellet control sample.
Parasite extracts were prepared from Percoll-purified schizonts treated with 0.15% w/v saponin to remove erythrocyte material. To solubilise parasite proteins, washed saponin-treated parasite pellets were resuspended in three volumes of NP-40 extraction buffer (10 mM Tris, 150 mM NaCl, 0.5 mM EDTA, 0.5% NP40, pH 7.5, with 1× protease inhibitors (Roche). Suspensions were incubated on ice for 10 min followed by centrifugation at 12,000g for 10 min at 4°C. For western blot, SDS-solubilised proteins were electrophoresed on 4%–15% Mini-PROTEAN TGX Stain-Free Protein Gels (Bio-Rad) under reducing conditions and proteins transferred to nitrocellulose membranes using a semidry Trans-Blot Turbo Transfer System (Bio-Rad). Antibody reactions were carried out in 1% skimmed milk in PBS with 0.1% Tween-20 and washed in PBS with 0.1% Tween-20. Appropriate horseradish peroxide-conjugated secondary antibodies were used, and antibody-bound washed membranes were incubated with Clarity Western ECL substrate (Bio-Rad) and exposed to X-ray film for visualisation.
Antibodies used for western blots presented in this work were as follows: anti-HA monoclonal antibody (mAb) 3F10 (diluted 1:1,000) (Roche); rat anti–binding immunoglobulin protein (BiP) (1:2,000); mouse anti-GAPDH mAb (1:20,000); rabbit anti-SERA5 polyclonal antibody (1:2,000); rabbit anti-AMA1 (1:2,000); rabbit anti-EBA175 (1:5,000); rabbit anti-Rh2b (1:2,000); mouse anti-MSP183 mAb (1:5,000); mouse anti-plasmepsin V mAb (1:2,000); rat anti-myosin A serum (1:10,000); and rabbit anti-pS19MyoA antibodies (1:1,000). Densitometry quantifications were performed using Image J.
IFAs
Thin blood films were fixed with 4% formaldehyde in PBS and permeabilised with PBS containing 0.1% (v/v) Triton X-100. Blocking and antibody binding was performed in PBS 3% BSA w/v at room temperature. Slides were mounted with ProLong Gold Antifade Mountant containing DAPI (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Images were acquired with a NIKON Eclipse Ti fluorescence microscope fitted with a Hamamatsu C11440 digital camera and overlaid in ICY bioimage analysis software or Image J. Super-resolution images were acquired using a Zeiss LSM880 confocal microscope with Airyscan detector in Airyscan SR mode. Antibodies additionally used for IFA not described above were rabbit anti-ARO and rabbit anti-GAP45 polyclonal antisera (both diluted 1:1,000), and a mouse anti-RON4 polyclonal antiserum (1:500). To visualise tight junction formation, mature schizonts of DMSO- and RAP-treated PKAc-HA:loxP parasites were Percoll enriched, incubated in medium containing C2 (1.5 μM) for 2 h, and then washed in warm medium and further incubated in the presence of fresh erythrocytes at 5% haematocrit for 30 min. In the case of the DMSO-treated control parasites, the medium contained 1 μM cytochalasin D to prevent invasion but allow junction formation. The cultures were then rapidly fixed by adding an equal volume of PBS containing 8% formaldehyde and 0.02% glutaraldehyde and shaking at 37°C for 20 min. Fixed parasites were then processed, as previously described, using the rabbit anti-AMA1 primary antibody at a dilution of 1:500.
Time-lapse video microscopy
Egress and invasion were monitored by differential interference contrast (DIC) microscopy using a Nikon Eclipse Ni light microscope fitted with a Hamamatsu C11440 digital camera. Egress videos were performed using one population of parasites stained briefly with Hoechst, as described previously. Invasion videos were performed using schizonts purified from DMSO- or RAP-treated ACβ-HA:loxP or PKA-HA:loxP cultures mixed with uninfected erythrocytes. DIC images were taken every 150 ms for at least 8 min, and the resulting time-lapse videos were processed using Nikon NIS Elements AR analysis software.
Flow cytometry
For growth assays, synchronous ring-stage parasites were adjusted to a 0.1% parasitaemia 1% haematocrit suspension and dispensed in triplicate into six-well plates. Samples of 100 μL were harvested at days 0, 2, and 4 for each well and fixed with 4% formaldehyde 0.2% glutaraldehyde in PBS. Fixed samples were stained with SYBR green and analysed by flow cytometry.
TEM
To enrich for attachment of PKAc-null merozoites to the surface of erythrocytes, RAP-treated PKAc-HA:loxP cultures were allowed to mature to schizont stage and then added to an excess of fresh erythrocytes and shaken gently at 37°C for 40 min. The cultures were then pelleted and resuspended in fixative (2% formaldehyde, 1% glutaraldehyde in PBS, pH 7.4) at 37°C for 15 min. Fixed material was briefly washed in PBS before mixing with 20% (w/v) dextran in complete medium containing bakers’ yeast, then freezing using a HPM100 high-pressure freezer (Leica). Vitrified cells were freeze-substituted using an EM AFS2 (Leica) into Lowicryl HM20 resin (EMS) with 0.2% (w/v) uranyl acetate and cut into 120-nm sections using a UC7 microtome (Leica). Sections were placed on glow-discharged carbon-coated copper finder grids (EMS) and post-stained with 0.2% (w/v) uranyl acetate and 4% (w/v) lead citrate. Images were recorded with a Tecnai T12 120-kV field emission gun electron microscope (FEI) equipped with a 4k × 4k Ultrascan 4000 CCD camera (Gatan). Tomograms were recorded using a Model 2040 dual-axis tomography holder (Fischione Instruments). Dual-axis tilt series were acquired from −60° to +60° with an increment of 2° using SerialEM. Tomograms were processed in IMOD using patch tracking for image alignment, and the final reconstruction was filtered using nonlinear anisotropic diffusion filtering.
Phosphoproteomics
The phosphoproteomics data presented are from two isobaric labelling experiments, the first involving ACβ-HA:loxP–derived samples and the second using PKAc-HA:loxP. Tightly synchronised, ring-stage ACβ-HA:loxP or PKAc-HA:loxP parasites were treated with 100 nM RAP or vehicle only (DMSO) and schizonts (about 45 h old) enriched on an approximately 70% Percoll cushion. The schizonts were treated for 2 h with 1 μM C2 (to arrest egress) and then washed to allow egress for 30 min, after which the cultures were treated with 0.15% saponin in PBS containing cOmplete Mini EDTA-free Protease and PhosSTOP Phosphatase inhibitor cocktails (both Roche) for 10 min at 4°C to lyse the host erythrocytes. Samples were washed twice in PBS containing protease and phosphatase inhibitors, snap-frozen in liquid nitrogen, and pellets stored at −80°C. Parasite pellets were resuspended in 1 mL 8 M urea in 50 mM HEPES, pH 8.5, containing protease and phosphatase inhibitors and 100 U/mL benzonase (Sigma). Proteins were extracted from the pellets using three 15-s bursts with a probe sonicator followed by a 10-min incubation on ice and a 30-min centrifugation at 14,000 rpm at 4°C. Protein content was estimated by a BCA protein assay and a 200-μg aliquot of each sample was taken for further processing. Samples were reduced with 10 mM dithiothreitol for 25 min at 56°C and then alkylated with 20 mM iodoacetamide for 30 min at room temperature. The alkylation reaction was quenched with an additional 10 mM dithiothreitol, and then each sample was diluted with 50 mM HEPES to reduce the urea concentration to <2 M prior to digestion. Proteolytic digestion was carried out by the addition of 4 μg LysC (WAKO) and incubated at 37°C for 2.5 h followed by the addition of 10 μg trypsin (Pierce) and overnight incubation at 37°C. After acidification, C18 MacroSpin columns (Nest Group) were used to clean up the digested peptide solutions and the eluted peptides dried by vacuum centrifugation. Samples were resuspended in 50 mM HEPES and labelled using the 0.8 mg Tandem Mass Tag 10plex isobaric reagent kit (Thermo Scientific) resuspended in acetonitrile. Labelling reactions were quenched with hydroxylamine, and a pool was made of each set of samples. Acetonitrile content was removed from the pooled TMT solution by vacuum centrifugation and then acidified before using a Sep-Pak C18 (Waters) to clean up the labelled peptide pool prior to phosphopeptide enrichment. The eluted TMT-labelled peptides were dried by vacuum centrifugation and phosphopeptide enrichment was subsequently carried out using the sequential metal oxide affinity chromatography (SMOAC) strategy with High Select TiO2 and Fe-NTA enrichment kits (Thermo Scientific). Eluates were combined prior to fractionation with the Pierce High pH Reversed-Phase Peptide Fractionation kit (Thermo Scientific). The dried TMT-labelled phosphopeptide fractions generated were resuspended in 0.1% TFA for LC-MS/MS analysis using a U3000 RSLCnano system (Thermo Scientific) interfaced with an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos (Thermo Scientific). Each peptide fraction was pre-concentrated on an Acclaim PepMap 100 trapping column before separation on a 50-cm, 75-μm I.D. EASY-Spray Pepmap column over a 3-h gradient run at 40°C, eluted directly into the mass spectrometer. The instrument was run in data-dependent acquisition mode with the most abundant peptides selected for MS/MS fragmentation. Two replicate injections were made for each fraction with different fragmentation methods based on the MS2 HCD and MSA SPS MS3 strategies described. The acquired raw mass spectrometric data were processed in MaxQuant (version 1.6.2.10) for peptide and protein identification; the database search was performed using the Andromeda search engine against the Homo sapiens canonical sequences from UniProtKB (release 2018_05) and P. falciparum 3D7 sequences from PlasmoDB-39. Fixed modifications were set as Carbamidomethyl (C) and variable modifications set as Oxidation (M) and Phospho (STY). The estimated false discovery rate was set to 1% at the peptide, protein, and site levels. A maximum of two missed cleavages were allowed. Reporter ion MS2 or Reporter ion MS3 was appropriately selected for each raw file. Other parameters were used as preset in the software. The MaxQuant output file PhosphoSTY Sites.txt, an FDR-controlled site-based table compiled by MaxQuant from the relevant information about the identified peptides, was imported into Perseus (v1.4.0.2) for data evaluation. Sites described as ‘enriched’ in the text are those that were quantified more highly in the three DMSO-treated samples compared with the three RAP-treated and p < 0.05 (Welch t test, two sided, S0 = 0). Sites described as significantly changed in the text are those that were quantified more highly in the three DMSO-treated samples compared with the three RAP-treated, p < 0.05 (Welch t test, two sided), and are still considered changed when S0 is set to 0.2 in Perseus. Sequence logos were generated using IceLogo (https://iomics.ugent.be/icelogoserver/). The mass spectrometry proteomics data have been deposited to the ProteomeXchange Consortium (http://proteomecentral.proteomexchange.org) via the PRIDE partner repository with the dataset identifier PXD012143.
Recombinant AMA1cyt protein expression, preparation, and phosphorylation
Recombinant AMA1 cytoplasmic tail protein (residues 567–622) with a thrombin-cleavable GST fusion (GST-AMA1cyt), or an AMA1 Ser610Ala point mutant of the same protein (GST-AMA1cyt _S610A), was expressed in Escherichia coli BL21 and purified as described previously. For NMR experiments, labelled protein was produced using E. coli grown in M9 medium containing 15N ammonium sulphate and 13C glucose as the sole nitrogen and carbon sources. To cleave the GST component, 100 μg GST-AMA1cyt protein was treated with one unit of human alpha-thrombin (HTI) overnight at 18°C in 50 mM Tris-HCl, pH 8.2, and 2 mM CaCl2. Following the digestion, glutathione agarose (Sigma) was used in excess to trap GST in solution and was later removed by centrifugation. The protein solution was then passed through a Superdex 75 HR 26/60 column equilibrated with 20 mM Tris-HCl, pH 8.2, and 150 mM NaCl to remove thrombin and residual GST. For phosphorylation, 200 μg of AMA1cyt in 20 mM Tris-HCl, pH 8.2, and 150 mM NaCl was treated with 3.5 μg of mouse PKAc-α (Bioaffin GmbH & Co KG) in the presence of 2 mM ATP, 20 mM MgCl2, and 2 mM DTT and incubated overnight at 30°C. The protein solution was then passed through a Superdex 75 HR 26/60 column equilibrated in 20 mM Tris-HCl, pH 8.2, and 150 mM NaCl. This step completely removed PKAc-α.
CD
Far-UV CD spectra were recorded on a Jasco J-815 spectropolarimeter fitted with a CDF-426S Peltier unit. CD measurements of all GST fusion proteins (free GST, GST-AMA1cyt, and GST-AMA1cyt_pS610) were made at a protein concentration of 0.15 mg/mL in 20 mM Tris-HCl, pH 8.2, 150 mM NaCl, using fused silica cuvettes with 1-mm path lengths (Hellma). Spectra were typically recorded with 0.1-nm resolution, with the baseline corrected by subtraction of the appropriate buffer spectrum and the contribution of GST subtracted from the unphosphorylated and PKA-phosphorylated GST-AMA1cyt protein fusions for each secondary structure element (alpha, beta, turn, and random) at the residue level. CD intensities are presented as the CD absorption coefficient calculated on a mean residue weight basis (ΔεMRW). Secondary structure content was estimated using methods described previously.
NMR spectroscopy
NMR experiments were performed on uniformly 15N- and 13C-labelled samples at 25°C in 50 mM Tris, 150 mM NaCl on Bruker 600-, 700-, and 800-MHz spectrometers equipped with pulsed-field gradient units and triple resonance probes. Chemical shifts (1H, 15N, and 13C) and NOEs of AMA1cyt and AMA1cyt_pSer610 were determined by performing standard triple resonance experiments. NMR data were processed with NMRPipe/NMRDraw and analysed with XEASY. TALOS+ was used to determine the secondary structure propensity of pAMA-1 on the basis of the measured 1H, 15N, 13Cα, 13Cβ, and 13CO chemical shifts.
Author contributions
Unless otherwise stated all experiments were designed and carried out by AP and/or AJP. The order of co-first authors was determined by coin toss. MJB and DAB supervised the work overall and CF provided intellectual input into the design and interpretation of experiments. HF and AS were involved with the design, execution and analysis of the phosphoproteomic mass spectrometry; CB performed the TEM; MT, TWG, and CWM produced the AMA1cyt recombinant proteins; CWM performed the CD under the supervision of SRM; GN performed the NMR experiments under the supervision of AR.