ABSTRACT:
The aim of this study was the identification of novel biomarker candidates for the diagnosis of cholangiocellular carcinoma (CCC) and its immunohistochemical differentiation from benign liver and bile duct cells. CCC is a primary cancer that arises from the epithelial cells of bile ducts and is characterized by high mortality rates due to its late clinical presentation and limited treatment options. Tumorous tissue and adjacent non-tumorous liver tissue from eight CCC patients were analyzed by means of two-dimensional differential in-gel electrophoresis and mass-spectrometry-based label-free proteomics. After data analysis and statistical evaluation of the proteins found to be differentially regulated between the two experimental groups (fold change ≥ 1.5; p value ≤ 0.05), 14 candidate proteins were chosen for determination of the cell-type-specific expression profile via immunohistochemistry in a cohort of 14 patients. This confirmed the significant up-regulation of serpin H1, 14-3-3 protein sigma, and stress-induced phosphoprotein 1 in tumorous cholangiocytes relative to normal hepatocytes and non-tumorous cholangiocytes, whereas some proteins were detectable specifically in hepatocytes. Because stress-induced phosphoprotein 1 exhibited both sensitivity and specificity of 100%, an immunohistochemical verification examining tissue sections of 60 CCC patients was performed. This resulted in a specificity of 98% and a sensitivity of 64%. We therefore conclude that this protein should be considered as a potential diagnostic biomarker for CCC in an immunohistochemical application, possibly in combination with other candidates from this study in the form of a biomarker panel. This could improve the differential diagnosis of CCC and benign bile duct diseases, as well as metastatic malignancies in the liver.
METHODS:
EXPERIMENTAL PROCEDURES
Clinical Data
Non-tumorous liver tissue and cholangiocellular carcinoma tissue from 77 CCC patients (48 females and 29 males) was collected during surgery at the University Hospital of Essen, Department of General, Visceral and Transplantation Surgery, Germany. The age of the patients at the time of operation ranged from 28 to 81 years (mean 62) (supplemental material). Informed consent was obtained from each patient, and the study protocol conformed to the ethical guidelines of the 1975 Declaration of Helsinki. The local ethics committee approved the study (11-4839-BO).
Sample Set Composition
Three sample sets were created (supplemental material). Sample set 1, which was used for 2D-DIGE and label-free LC-MS experiments, contained non-tumorous liver tissue and CCC tissue samples from eight patients aged between 42 and 78. These samples were collected in the time period from 2002 to 2012. Sample set 2, used for immunohistochemical determination of cell-type-specific protein expression, contained samples from 14 patients, including 5 from sample set 1. The patients' ages ranged from 31 to 78 at the time of operation, with surgery performed between 2010 and 2012. For immunohistochemical verification, sample set 3, from an independent cohort of 60 patients, was analyzed. These patients were aged 28 to 81 and underwent surgery between 2001 and 2010.
Tissue Preparation
For pathological examination and immunohistochemical staining, non-tumorous liver tissue and CCC tumor tissue were fixed in buffered formalin and paraffin embedded. For the proteomics studies, the samples were placed on ice immediately after the resection, snap-frozen, and stored at −80 °C. Protein extraction was performed via sonication (six 10-s pulses on ice) in sample buffer (30 mm Tris-HCl, 2 m thiourea, 7 m urea, 4% CHAPS, pH 8.5) and subsequent centrifugation (15,000 × g, 5 min). The supernatant was collected, and the protein concentration was determined via protein assay (Bio-Rad, Hercules, CA).
2D-DIGE Analysis
Protein Labeling
For 2D-DIGE experiments, minimal labeling using 400 pmol cyanine dyes (GE Healthcare, Munich, Germany) per 50 μg of protein was performed according to the manufacturer's instructions. To avoid bias, tumorous and non-tumorous samples were labeled alternately with Cy3 and Cy5 dyes. A mixture of all samples was labeled with Cy2 for use as an internal standard.
Two-dimensional Gel Electrophoresis
For 2D-DIGE experiments, the appropriate Cy3- and Cy5-labeled sample pairs from each patient were mixed with the internal standard (ratio 1:1:1). Isoelectric focusing and second-dimension SDS-PAGE were performed as described previously.
Image Acquisition and Evaluation
2D-DIGE gels were scanned on a Typhoon 9400 (Amersham Biosciences) at a resolution of 100 μm. Images were preprocessed using ImageQuantTM (GE Healthcare) before intra-gel spot detection, inter-gel matching, and normalization of spot intensities to the internal standard in DeCyder 2DTM (GE Healthcare). A statistical analysis was performed with the Extended Data Analysis tool of DeCyder2DTM and resulted in a list of proteins meeting the following criteria: (i) protein spot present in at least 70% of all spot maps, (ii) p value of Student's t test (paired, two-sided) ≤ 0.05 (after adjustment for multiple testing, controlling the false discovery rate using the method of Benjamini and Hochberg), and (iii) absolute average ratio between experimental groups ≥ 1.5. These differentially expressed proteins were extracted from a preparative two-dimensional gel and identified via MALDI-TOF-MS.
Digestion and Protein Identification
Protein spots dissected from preparative gels were subjected to in-gel digestion with trypsin (Promega, Madison, WI), and the peptides were then extracted from the gel matrix. MALDI-TOF-MS analyses were performed on an UltraFlexTM II instrument (Bruker Daltonics, Bremen, Germany). Protein identifications were done with ProteinScape (v. 1.3 SR2) (Bruker Daltonics) using the UniProt database (release 2012 09, 538,010 entries) via Mascot (v. 2.3.0.2) (Matrix Sciences Ltd., London, UK). The database searches were run with propionamide (C) and oxidation (M) as variable modifications, a mass tolerance of 100 ppm, and a maximum of one missed cleavage. Proteins with a Mascot score > 64 were considered to be assigned correctly. Further details concerning the MALDI-TOF-MS analyses and protein identifications via ProteinScape have been published previously. PMF spectra and peak lists containing peptide annotations are listed in the supplemental material.
Label-free Analysis
Sample Preparation
Samples were loaded onto a 4–20% SDS-PAGE gel (TGXTM precast gels, Bio-Rad) and run for 1 min at 300 V. The proteins were stained with Coomassie Brilliant Blue and digested in-gel using trypsin (SERVA Electrophoresis, Heidelberg, Germany). The peptides were extracted via sonication on ice in 20 μl of 50% acetonitrile in 0.1% TFA. Acetonitrile was removed by means of vacuum centrifugation before the peptides were rehydrated in 0.1% TFA. The peptide concentration was determined via amino acid analysis on an ACQUITY-UPLC with an AccQ Tag Ultra-UPLC column (Waters, Eschborn, Germany) calibrated with Pierce Amino Acid Standard (Thermo Scientific, Bremen, Germany).
LC-MS/MS Analysis
Label-free MS-based analysis was performed on an Ultimate 3000 RSLCnano system (Dionex, Idstein, Germany) online coupled to an LTQ Orbitrap Elite (Thermo Scientific). For each analysis, 350 ng of tryptic peptides dissolved in 15 μl of 0.1% TFA were injected and pre-concentrated on a trap column (Acclaim® PepMap 100, 300 μm × 5 mm, C18, 5 μm, 100 Å) for 7 min with 0.1% TFA at a flow rate of 30 μl/min. The separation was performed on an analytical column (Acclaim® PepMap RSLC, 75 μm × 50 cm, nano Viper, C18, 2 μm, 100 Å) with a gradient from 5% to 40% solvent B over 98 min (solvent A, 0.1% formic acid; solvent B, 0.1% formic acid, 84% acetonitrile). The flow rate was set at 400 nl/min, and the column oven temperature was 60 °C. The mass spectrometer was operated in data-dependent mode. Full-scan MS spectra were acquired at a resolution of 60,000 in the Orbitrap analyzer, and tandem mass spectra of the 20 most abundant peaks were measured in the linear ion trap after peptide fragmentation by collision-induced dissociation.
Peptide Quantification and Filtering
The ion-intensity-based label-free quantification was done by evaluating the LC-MS data with Progenesis LC-MSTM (v. 4.0.4265.42984, Nonlinear Dynamics Ltd., Newcastle upon Tyne, UK). The generated .raw files were imported, and the most representative LC-MS run was selected as the reference to which the retention times of the precursor masses of all other runs were aligned. From the feature list containing m/z values of all peptides, only those charged positively 2-, 3-, or 4-fold were used for quantification. To correct experimental variation between the runs, the raw abundances of each feature were normalized. Details regarding the normalization have been published previously.
Protein Identification
Proteins from LC-MS runs were identified by Proteome Discoverer (v. 1.3) (Thermo Scientific) searching the UniProt database (release 2012 02, 534,695 entries) via Mascot (v. 2.3.0.2) (Matrix Sciences Ltd.). The following search parameters were applied: variable modifications, oxidation (M) and propionamide (C); tryptic digestion with up to one missed cleavage; precursor ion mass tolerance of 5 ppm; and fragment ion mass tolerance of 0.4 Da. The search results were filtered with a false discovery rate of less than 1% on the peptide level, which was calculated using the Percolator tool implemented in Proteome Discoverer before the data were imported into Progenesis LC-MS. In this way, each peptide was matched to a previously quantified feature. The mass spectrometry proteomics data of the label-free analysis have been deposited to the ProteomeXchange Consortium (http://proteomecentral.proteomexchange.org) via the PRIDE partner repository with the dataset identifier PXD000534 and DOI 10.6019/PXD000534.
Protein Quantification and Filtering
For the protein quantification, only peptides unique to one protein within the particular experiment were used. The normalized sum of all the unique peptide ion abundances identified as coming from a specific protein was used to calculate the p value of Student's t test (paired, two-sided) and the fold change for each protein. The protein grouping function of Progenesis LC-MS was disabled. Proteins showing a p value ≤ 0.05 after false discovery rate correction and an absolute fold change greater than 1.5 were assumed to be differentially regulated. Proteins quantified with only one distinct peptide (unique by mass spectrometry) were removed from the experiment.
Annotation of Regulated Proteins
Previously generated lists of differential proteins were processed using Ingenuity Pathway Analysis software (v. 12402621, Ingenuity Systems, Redwood City, CA) in order to assign their cellular localizations. Computer-aided literature research was performed using SCAIView software (Fraunhofer Institute for Algorithms and Scientific Computing SCAI, Sankt Augustin, Germany).
Immunohistochemistry
Preparation and Staining of Tissue Samples
Tissue microarrays with three cores per case (core diameter: 1 mm) from CCC and adjacent non-tumorous liver tissue were constructed. Paraffin-embedded 4-μm slides were dewaxed and pretreated in EDTA buffer (pH 9) at 95 °C for 20 min. All immunohistochemical stains were performed with an automated staining device (Dako Autostainer, Glostrup, Denmark). Both the source of the primary antibodies and the technical staining details of the automatically performed stainings are listed in the supplemental material. All stains were developed using a polymer kit (ZytoChemPlus (HRP), POLHRS-100, Zytomed Systems, Berlin, Germany). Primary antibodies were replaced by mouse or rabbit immunoglobulin for negative controls.
Evaluation of Immunohistochemical Stains
Using an immunoreactive score modeled after the work of Remmele and Stegner, stained tissue was graded into four categories regarding its staining intensity (0 = no, 1 = faint, 2 = moderate, and 3 = strong staining) and into five categories for the approximate proportion of positive cells (0 = no, 1 = up to 5%, 2 = 6% to 10%, 3 = 11% to 50%, and 4 = more than 50% positive cells). The examination was performed by two experienced independent pathologists whose results were averaged. The final immunoreactive score was calculated by multiplying the staining intensity by the number of positive cells (minimum 0, maximum 12).
To assess each marker's ability to separate tumor samples from hepatocytes and cholangiocytes, receiver operating characteristic analysis was performed using the R package pROC. AUC values were determined along with the corresponding 95% confidence intervals (with the variance of the AUC being computed as defined by DeLong et al.). In order to compare the diagnostic characteristics of the candidates and choose the most promising one for validation in a larger sample set, sensitivity and specificity were assessed at the best cutoff for each curve. Sensitivity was defined as the percentage of samples with positive staining of the targeted cell type, and specificity was defined as the percentage of samples without positive staining of other cells. Candidate-specific optimization is important in order to account for different staining behaviors of antibodies and leads to higher optimal cutoff values for antibodies with more intense background staining and lower cutoffs with less background. For optimization, we used Youden's criterion, which is equivalent to the maximization of the sum of sensitivity and specificity. In the case of multiple cutoffs yielding an optimal Youden score, the one with the highest specificity was chosen. For the observed values of sensitivity and specificity at the optimized cutoffs, 95% confidence intervals were computed as well (using the Clopper–Pearson method). Although optimization leads to overoptimistic diagnostic values, these values are suitable for comparing different candidates. Optimized cutoff values were used for verification in sample set 3 to ensure unbiased results. For the putatively CCC-specific markers, separate receiver operating characteristic curves were derived for the comparisons with hepatocytes and cholangiocytes. For putatively hepatocyte-specific proteins, AUC values and diagnostic values were calculated with an expectation of lower values in CCC cells.