ABSTRACT:
An outbreak of the novel coronavirus SARS-CoV-2, the causative agent of COVID-19 respiratory disease, has infected over 290,000 people since the end of 2019, killed over 12,000, and caused worldwide social and economic disruption. There are currently no antiviral drugs with proven efficacy nor are there vaccines for its prevention. Unfortunately, the scientific community has little knowledge of the molecular details of SARS-CoV-2 infection. To illuminate this, we cloned, tagged and expressed 26 of the 29 viral proteins in human cells and identified the human proteins physically associated with each using affinity-purification mass spectrometry (AP-MS), which identified 332 high confidence SARS-CoV-2-human protein-protein interactions (PPIs). Among these, we identify 67 druggable human proteins or host factors targeted by 69 existing FDA-approved drugs, drugs in clinical trials and/or preclinical compounds, that we are currently evaluating for efficacy in live SARS-CoV-2 infection assays. The identification of host dependency factors mediating virus infection may provide key insights into effective molecular targets for developing broadly acting antiviral therapeutics against SARS-CoV-2 and other deadly coronavirus strains.
METHODS:
Global analysis of SARS-CoV-2 host interacting proteins
Our affinity purification-mass spectrometry analysis identified 332 protein interactions between SARS-CoV-2 proteins and human proteins (Extended Data Fig. 1, Supplementary Tables 1, 2; also see Fig. 3). We studied the interacting human proteins in regards to their cell biology, anatomical expression patterns, expression changes during SARS-CoV-2 infection and in relation to other maps of pathogen interacting proteins(Fig. 2a). For each of the viral proteins, we performed Gene Ontology enrichment analysis (Fig. 2b, Extended Data Fig. 2), identifying the major cell biological processes of the interacting proteins, including lipoprotein metabolism (S), nuclear transport (Nsp7), and biogenesis of ribonucleoprotein (Nsp8). To discover potential binding interfaces, we performed an enrichment for domain families within the interacting proteins of each viral bait (Extended Data Fig. 3). As examples, we note the enrichment of DNA polymerase domains in the interactors of Nsp1 and the enrichment of bromodomains and extra-terminal domain (BET) family for interactors of E (see also Figs. 3, 4). In line with the latter, the interactors of E are also enriched in genes annotated for binding to acetylated histones (Fig. 2b).
While the cells used for these AP-MS experiments, HEK-293T kidney cells, are permissive to SARS-CoV-2 infection, they do not represent the primary physiological site of infection. Therefore, we asked whether the host proteins bound by SARS-CoV-2 might be specifically relevant to the virus’s typical environment, lung tissue. We tested if the interacting human proteins were preferentially highly expressed, at the protein level, in any of 29 human tissues, which identified the lung as the tissue with the highest expression of the prey proteins relative to the average proteome (Fig. 2c). In accordance to this, when compared to overall RefSeq gene expression in the lung (median=3.198 TPM), the interacting proteins were more highly expressed (median=25.52 TPM, p=0.0007; t-test, Extended Data Fig. 4) and were also specifically enriched in lung expression relative to other tissues (Extended Data Fig. 5). These data support the hypothesis that SARS-CoV-2 preferentially hijacks proteins available in lung tissue and the degree of tissue specific expression may facilitate the drug targeting of host factors with fewer systemic side-effects; this observation is particularly compelling given its derivation from HEK293 cells, which are themselves not lung derived. To further study the relevance of our map, we analyzed the recently reported protein abundance changes during SARS-CoV-2 infection. We calculated, when possible, the correlation between changes in abundance of viral proteins and their human interaction partners across the 4 timepoints reported. Interacting pairs tended to have stronger correlated changes than other pairs of viral-human proteins (Fig. 2d, KS test p-value=4.8e–05), arguing that the AP-MS derived interactions are of high relevance for the target tissue and the infection context. We compared our SARS-CoV-2 interaction map with those derived for 10 other pathogens (Fig. 2e), identifying West Nile Virus (WNV) and Mycobacterium tuberculosis (Mtb) as having the most similar host protein interaction partners. The association with Mtb is particularly interesting considering it also infects lung tissue.
Finally, we studied the evolutionary properties of the host proteins. Successful virus spread in a diverse population in theory could be facilitated by a reliance on conserved host molecular components, therefore we analyzed the conservation of the human proteins identified in the SARS-CoV-2 interactome. Relative to a control sample of genes, the 332 SARS-CoV-2 interacting human proteins had depleted missense and premature stop mutations in gnomAD, indicating that they have reduced genetic variation in human populations (Extended Data Fig. 6).
The SARS-CoV-2 interactome reveals novel aspects of SARS-CoV-2 biology
Our study highlighted interactions between SARS-CoV-2 proteins and human proteins with a range of functions including DNA replication (Nsp1), epigenetic and gene expression regulators (Nsp5, Nsp8, Nsp13, E), vesicle trafficking (Nsp6, Nsp7, Nsp10, Nsp13, Nsp15, Orf3a, E, M, Orf8), lipid modification (Spike), RNA processing and regulation (Nsp8, N), ubiquitin ligases (Orf10), signaling (Nsp8, Nsp13, N, Orf9b), nuclear transport machinery (Nsp9, Nsp15, Orf6), cytoskeleton (Nsp1, Nsp13), mitochondria (Nsp4, Nsp8, Orf9c), and extracellular matrix (Nsp9) (Fig. 3).
A prominent number of interactions were related to lipid modifications and vesicle trafficking. Interestingly, the Spike protein (S) interacts with the GOLGA7-ZDHHC5 acyl-transferase complex, which likely mediates palmitoylation on its cytosolic tail (see also Appendix). Palmitoylation has been reported to facilitate membrane fusion by SARS-CoV Spike and suggests a potential target for therapeutic inhibition. Interestingly, ZDHHC5 also has a published role in allowing anthrax toxin to enter cells, suggesting that inhibition of this enzyme could have broad utility. Host interactions of Nsp8 (signal recognition particle), Orf8 (endoplasmic reticulum quality control), M (ER structural morphology proteins), Nsp13 (golgins) may facilitate the dramatic reconfiguration of ER/Golgi trafficking during coronavirus infection, and interactions in peripheral compartments by Nsp6 and M (vacuolar ATPase), Nsp7 (Rabs), Nsp10 (AP2), E (AP3), and Orf3a (HOPS) may also modify endomembrane compartments to favor coronavirus replication.
We identified protein-protein interactions with the main protease Nsp5, using both wild-type and catalytic dead (C145A) constructs. For wild-type Nsp5, we identified one high-confidence interaction, the epigenetic regulator histone deacetylase 2 (HDAC2), and predicted a cleavage site between the HDAC domain and the nuclear localization sequence, suggesting that Nsp5 may inhibit HDAC2 transport into the nucleus (Extended Data Fig. 7), potentially impacting the published functions of HDAC2 in mediating inflammation and interferon response. We also identified an interaction of Nsp5 (C145A) with tRNA methyltransferase 1 (TRMT1), which is responsible for synthesis of the dimethylguanosine (m2,2G) base modification on both nuclear and mitochondrial tRNAs. We predict TRMT1 is also cleaved by Nsp5, removing its zinc finger and nuclear localization signal and likely resulting in an exclusively mitochondrial localization (Extended Data Fig. 7).
SARS-CoV-2 interacts with multiple innate immune pathways
We identified a number of cellular proteins implicated in innate immune signaling that are targeted by several SARS-CoV-2 viral proteins. Interestingly, we found that Nsp13 interacts with two key players of IFN signaling pathway including TANK-binding kinase 1 (TBK1) and TANK-binding kinase 1-binding protein 1 (TBKBP1/SINTBAD). SINTBAD acts as a critical adaptor protein between TBK1 and IKKi and therefore mediates induction of IRF-dependent transcription. Further, Nsp13 interacts with multiple proteins of the TLE family, which are known to modulate NF-κB inflammatory response. RNF41/Nrdp1, an E3 ubiquitin ligase is targeted by Nsp15 protein which promotes activation of TBK1 and IRF3 and therefore increases type I interferon production. Two other E3 ubiquitin ligases, TRIM59 and MIB1 regulate antiviral innate immune signaling and are usurped by Orf3a and Nsp9, respectively. Orf9c protein was found to interact with multiple proteins that modulate IkB kinase and NF-kB signaling pathway including NLRX1, F2RL1, NDFIP2. We also found that Orf9b interacts with a mitochondrial import receptor, Tom70, which acts as an essential adaptor linking MAVS to TBK1/IRF3, resulting in the activation of IRF-3.
N targets stress granule protein G3BP1, an essential antiviral protein which is known to induce innate immune response through multiple mechanisms. Common among coronaviridae is the manipulation of stress granules (SG) and related RNA biology, possibly leading to suppression of stress granules and host translation shutoff. This functionality seems to benefit viral replication, as stress granules are inhibitory to replication of MERS-CoV and other viruses. The SARS-CoV-2 nucleocapsid (N) interactome includes many host mRNA binding proteins, including the SG related factors G3BP1/2, the mTOR translational repressors LARP1, and the protein kinases CK2 (Fig. 4a). SGs are induced by protein kinase R (PKR)-mediated phosphorylation of eIF2α upon viral dsRNA recognition. Promoting G3BP aggregation via the eIF4A inhibitor Zotatafin or reducing SG disassembly by Silmitasertib inhibition of CK2 warrant investigation for treatment of SARS-CoV-2. The mTOR inhibitor rapamycin disrupts the binding of LARP1 to mTORC1 and has been shown to reduce MERS infection by ~60% in vitro, another drug that could be tested for repurposing.
Orf6 of SARS-CoV has been shown to play a role in antagonizing host interferon signaling; we identified a novel, high-confidence interaction between SARS-CoV-2 Orf6 and NUP98-RAE1, an interferon-inducible mRNA nuclear export complex that is hijacked or degraded by multiple viruses, including VSV, Influenza-A, KSHV, and Polio, and is a restriction factor for Influenza-A infection. The X-ray structure of VSV M protein complexed with NUP98-RAE1 reveals key binding interactions that include a buried methionine residue on the M-protein packing into a hydrophobic pocket in RAE1, as well as neighboring acidic residues interacting with a basic patch on the NUP98-RAE1 complex (Fig 4b). These binding features are also present in a conserved motif in the C-terminal region of SARS-CoV-2 Orf6 (Fig. 4b, Extended Data Fig. 8), providing a structural hypothesis for the observed SARS-CoV-2-NUP98-RAE1 interaction. Moreover, a peptide containing the binding region of the VSV M protein was previously shown to outcompete RNA binding to NUP98-RAE1, suggesting a role in interfering with mRNA export. These observations suggest a viral strategy to target the RNA nuclear export activity of RAE1, potentially revealing a mode of interferon antagonism by SARS-CoV-2.
The novel Orf10 of SARS-CoV-2 interacts with a Cullin ubiquitin ligase complex
Viruses commonly hijack ubiquitination pathways for replication and pathogenesis. The novel Orf10 of SARS-CoV-2 interacts with multiple members of a Cullin 2 (CUL2) RING E3 ligase complex (Fig. 4c), specifically the CUL2ZYG11B complex. ZYG11B, a substrate adapter of CUL2 that targets substrates with exposed N-terminal glycines for degradation, is the highest scoring protein in the Orf10 interactome suggesting its direct interaction with Orf10. Orf10 may bind to the CUL2ZYG11B complex and hijack it for ubiquitination and degradation of restriction factors. The ubiquitin transfer to a substrate requires neddylation of CUL2 via NEDD8-activating enzyme (NAE), a druggable target that can be inhibited by the small molecule Pevonedistat (Fig. 4c).
SARS-CoV-2 envelope interacts with bromodomain proteins
Surprisingly, we find that the transmembrane protein E binds to the bromodomain-containing proteins BRD2 and BRD4 (Fig. 4d, Extended Data Fig. 9), potentially disrupting BRD-histone binding by mimicking histone structure. BRD2 is a member of the bromodomain and extra-terminal (BET) domain family whose members bind acetylated histones to regulate gene transcription. The N-terminus of histone 2A shares local sequence similarity over an alpha-helix of approximately 15 residues, some of which are in a transmembrane segment, of Protein E (Fig. 4d). Moreover, this matching region of the histone is spanned by acetylated lysine residues shown to bind BRD2. This analysis may suggest that Protein E mimics the histone to disrupt its interaction with BRD2, thus inducing changes in host’s protein expression that are beneficial to the virus.
For a more comprehensive overview of the virus-host interactions we detected, see Supplemental Discussion.
Identification of existing drugs targeting SARS-CoV-2 human host factors.
To identify small molecules targeting human proteins in the SARS-CoV-2 interactome, we sought ligands known to interact with the human proteins, often directly but also by pathway and complexes, drawing on chemoinformatics databases and analyses (Methods). Molecules were prioritized by the statistical significance of the interaction between the human and viral proteins; by their status as approved drugs, investigational new drugs (INDs, “clinical” in Table 1a,b), or as preclinical candidates; by their apparent selectivity; and by their availability (for purchase availability notes, see Supplemental Tables 3 and 4). Chemoinformatics searches yielded 15 approved drugs, four investigational new drugs (clinical), and 18 pre-clinical candidates (Table 1a), while specialist knowledge revealed 12 approved drugs, 10 investigational new drugs (clinical), and 10 preclinical candidates (Table 1b). Of the 332 human targets that interact with the viral bait proteins with high significance, 63 have drugs/INDs/preclinical molecules that modulate them (Fig. 3). If we reduce our protein interaction score threshold slightly, we find an additional four human targets, revealing a total of 67 human targets (Supplementary Tables 3 and 4). The drug-human protein associations may be overlaid on top of our protein interaction network, highlighting potentially druggable host interactions (Fig. 5a).
There are several mechanistically interesting, and potentially disease-relevant drug-target interactions revealed in the chemoinformatic network (Fig. 5a). Among them, the well-known chemical probe, Bafilomycin A1, is a potent inhibitor of the V1-ATPase, subunits of which interact with Nsp6 and M. Bafilomycin’s inhibition of this cotransporter acts to prevent the acidification of the lysosome, inhibiting autophagy and endosome trafficking pathways, which may impact the viral life-cycle. Similarly, drugs exist to target several well-known epigenetic regulators prominent among the human interactors, including HDAC2, BRD2 and BRD4, which interact with viral proteins nsp5 and E, respectively (Figs. 3 and 5a). The approved drug Valproic acid (an anticonvulsant) and the pre-clinical candidate Apicidin inhibit HDAC2 with affinities of 62 μM and 120 nM, respectively. Clinical compounds ABBV-744 and CPI-0610 act on BRD2/4, with an affinity of 2 nM or 39 nM, respectively -- several preclinical compounds also target bromodomain-containing proteins (Table 1a,b). As a final example, we were intrigued to observe that the SARS-CoV-2 Nsp6 protein interacts with the Sigma receptor, which is thought to regulate ER stress response. Similarly, the Sigma2 receptor interacted with the vial protein orf9. Both Sigma1 and Sigma2 are promiscuous receptors that interact with many non-polar, cationic drugs. We prioritized several of these drugs based on potency or potential disease relevance, including the antipsychotic Haloperidol, which binds in the low nM range to both receptors, and Chloroquine, which is currently in clinical trials for COVID-19 and has mid-nM activity vs the Sigma1 receptor, and low μM activity against the Sigma2 receptor. Because many patients are already treated with drugs that have off-target impact on Sigma receptors, associating clinical outcomes accompanying treatment with these drugs may merit investigation, a point to which we return. Finally, in addition to the druggable host factors, a few of which we have highlighted here, the SARS-CoV-2-human interactome reveals many traditionally “undruggable” targets. Among these, for instance, are components of the centriole such as CEP250, which interacts with the viral Nsp13. Intriguingly, a very recent patent disclosure revealed a natural product, WDB002, that directly and specifically targets CEP250. As a natural product, WDB002 would likely be harder to source than the molecules on which we have focused on here, but may well merit investigation. Similarly, other “undruggable” targets may be revealed to have compounds that could usefully perturb the viral-human interaction network, and act as leads to therapeutics.
Beyond direct interactions, several drug-pathway interactions seemed noteworthy. The human purine biosynthesis enzyme Inosine-5′-monophosphate dehydrogenase (IMPDH2) interacts with the viral protein nsp14. Several chemically diverse compounds inhibit IMPDH2, including the clinically approved mycophenolic acid (20 nM), the approved antiviral drug ribavirin (200 nM), and the investigational new drug Merimepodib (10 nM) (Table 1a). Intriguingly, the preclinical molecule Sanglifehrin A (Table 1b) is known to act as a molecular glue linking IMPDH with cyclophilin A (Fig. 5b), which itself is implicated in viral capsid packaging, even though it itself is not a human “prey” in the viral-human protein interactome. Similarly, direct viral-human interactions with proteins regulated by the mTORC1 pathway, such as LARP1, and FKBP7, which interact with the viral N and Orf8 proteins, led us to inhibitors of mTORC1, even though that kinase itself is not found to directly interact with a viral protein (Fig. 5c). Sapanisertib and rapamycin are low nM inhibitors of mTORC1, while metformin is an indirect modulator of this protein complex.
MATERIALS AND METHODS
Genome annotation.
The genbank sequence for SARS-CoV-2 isolate 2019-nCoV/USA-WA1/2020, accession MN985325, was downloaded on January 24, 2020. In total, we identified 29 open reading frames and proteolytically mature proteins encoded by SARS-CoV-2. Proteolytic products resulting from Nsp3 and Nsp5-mediated cleavage of the Orf1a / Orf1ab polyprotein were predicted based on the protease specificity of SARS-CoV proteases, and 16 predicted nonstructural proteins (Nsps) were subsequently cloned (Nsp1-Nsp16). For the proteases Nsp3 (papain-like / Plpro) and Nsp5 (3Clike / 3CLpro), we also designed catalytic dyad/triad mutants: Nsp3 C857A and Nsp5 C145A . Open reading frames at the 3’ end of the viral genome annotated in the original genbank file included 4 Structural proteins: S, E, M, N, and the additional open reading frames Orf3a, Orf6, Orf7a, Orf8, and Orf10. Based on analysis of open reading frames in the genome and comparisons with other annotated SARS-CoV open reading frames, we annotated a further four open reading frames: Orf3b, Orf7b, Orf9b, and Orf9c.
Cell culture.
HEK293T cells were cultured in Dulbecco’s Modified Eagle’s Medium (Corning) supplemented with 10% Fetal Bovine Serum (Gibco, Life Technologies) and 1% Penicillin-Streptomycin (Corning) and maintained at 37°C in a humidified atmosphere of 5% CO2.
Transfection.
For each affinity purification, ten million HEK293T cells were plated per 15-cm dish and transfected with up to 15 μg of individual Strep-tagged expression constructs after 20–24 hours. Total plasmid was normalized to 15 μg with empty vector and complexed with PolyJet Transfection Reagent (SignaGen Laboratories) at a 1:3 μg:μl ratio of plasmid to transfection reagent based on manufacturer’s recommendations. After more than 38 hours, cells were dissociated at room temperature using 10 ml Dulbecco’s Phosphate Buffered Saline without calcium and magnesium (D-PBS) supplemented with 10 mM EDTA for at least 5 minutes and subsequently washed with 10 ml D-PBS. Each step was followed by centrifugation at 200 ×g, 4°C for 5 minutes. Cell pellets were frozen on dry ice and stored at − 80°C. At least three biological replicates were independently prepared for affinity purification.
Affinity purification.
Frozen cell pellets were thawed on ice for 15–20 minutes and suspended in 1 ml Lysis Buffer [IP Buffer (50 mM Tris-HCl, pH 7.4 at 4°C, 150 mM NaCl, 1 mM EDTA) supplemented with 0.5% Nonidet P 40 Substitute (NP40; Fluka Analytical) and cOmplete mini EDTA-free protease and PhosSTOP phosphatase inhibitor cocktails (Roche)]. Samples were then frozen on dry ice for 10–20 minutes and partially thawed at 37°C before incubation on a tube rotator for 30 minutes at 4°C and centrifugation at 13,000 ×g, 4°C for 15 minutes to pellet debris. After reserving 50 μl lysate, up to 48 samples were arrayed into a 96-well Deepwell plate for affinity purification on the KingFisher Flex Purification System (Thermo Scientific) as follows: MagStrep “type3” beads (30 μl; IBA Lifesciences) were equilibrated twice with 1 ml Wash Buffer (IP Buffer supplemented with 0.05% NP40) and incubated with 0.95 ml lysate for 2 hours. Beads were washed three times with 1 ml Wash Buffer and then once with 1 ml IP Buffer. To directly digest bead-bound proteins as well as elute proteins with biotin, beads were manually suspended in IP Buffer and divided in half before transferring to 50 μl Denaturation-Reduction Buffer (2 M urea, 50 mM Tris-HCl pH 8.0, 1 mM DTT) and 50 μl 1x Buffer BXT (IBA Lifesciences) dispensed into a single 96-well KF microtiter plate, respectively. Purified proteins were first eluted at room temperature for 30 minutes with constant shaking at 1,100 rpm on a ThermoMixer C incubator. After removing eluates, on-bead digestion proceeded (below). Strep-tagged protein expression in lysates and enrichment in eluates were assessed by western blot and silver stain, respectively. The KingFisher Flex Purification System was placed in the cold room and allowed to equilibrate to 4°C overnight before use. All automated protocol steps were performed using the slow mix speed and the following mix times: 30 seconds for equilibration/wash steps, 2 hours for binding, and 1 minute for final bead release. Three 10 second bead collection times were used between all steps.
On-bead digestion.
Bead-bound proteins were denatured and reduced at 37°C for 30 minutes and after bringing to room temperature, alkylated in the dark with 3 mM iodoacetamide for 45 minutes and quenched with 3 mM DTT for 10 minutes. Proteins were then incubated at 37°C, initially for 4 hours with 1.5 μl trypsin (0.5 μg/μl; Promega) and then another 1–2 hours with 0.5 μl additional trypsin. To offset evaporation, 15 μl 50 mM Tris-HCl, pH 8.0 were added before trypsin digestion. All steps were performed with constant shaking at 1,100 rpm on a ThermoMixer C incubator. Resulting peptides were combined with 50 μl 50 mM Tris-HCl, pH 8.0 used to rinse beads and acidified with trifluoroacetic acid (0.5% final, pH < 2.0). Acidified peptides were desalted for MS analysis using a BioPureSPE Mini 96-Well Plate (20mg PROTO 300 C18; The Nest Group, Inc.) according to standard protocols.
Mass spectrometry data acquisition and analysis.
Samples were re-suspended in 4% formic acid, 2% acetonitrile solution, and separated by a reversed-phase gradient over a nanoflow C18 column (Dr. Maisch). Each sample was analyzed on two different mass spectrometers. First, a 75 min acquisition, in which peptides were directly injected via a Easy-nLC 1200 (Thermo) into a Q-Exactive Plus mass spectrometer (Thermo), with all MS1 and MS2 spectra collected in the orbitrap. For all acquisitions, QCloud was used to control instrument longitudinal performance during the project. All proteomic data was searched against the human proteome (uniprot reviewed sequences downloaded February 28th, 2020), EGFP sequence, and the SARS-CoV-2 protein sequences using the default settings for MaxQuant. Detected peptides and proteins were filtered to 1% false discovery rate in MaxQuant, and identified proteins were then subjected to protein-protein interaction scoring with both SAINTexpress and MiST. We applied a two step filtering strategy to determine the final list of reported interactors which relied on two different scoring stringency cutoffs. In the first step, we chose all protein interactions that possess a MiST score ≥ 0.7, a SAINTexpress BFDR ≤ 0.05 and an average spectral count ≥ 2. For all proteins that fulfilled these criteria we extracted information about stable protein complexes they participate in from the CORUM database of known protein complexes. In the second step we then relaxed the stringency and recovered additional interactors that (1) form complexes with interactors determined in filtering step 1 and (2) fulfill the following criteria: MiST score ≥ 0.6, SAINTexpress BFDR ≤ 0.05 and average spectral counts ≥ 2. Proteins that fulfilled filtering criteria in either step 1 or step 2 were considered to be HC-PPIs and visualized with cytoscape. Using this filtering criteria, nearly all of our baits recovered a number of HC-PPIs in close alignment with previous datasets reporting an average of ~6 PPIs per bait. However, for a subset of baits (Orf8, Nsp8, Nsp13, and orf9c) we observed a much higher number of PPIs passing these filtering criteria. For these four baits, the MiST scoring was instead performed using an larger in-house database of 87 baits that were prepared and processed in an analogous manner to this SARS-CoV-2 dataset. This was done to provide a more comprehensive collection of baits for comparison, to minimize the classification of non-specifically binding background proteins as HC-PPIs. All mass spectrometry raw data and search results files have been deposited to the ProteomeXchange Consortium via the PRIDE partner repository with the dataset identifier PXD018117. PPI networks have also been uploaded to NDEx.
Gene Ontology Over-representation Analysis.
The targets of each bait were tested for enrichment of Gene Ontology (GO Biological Process) terms. The over-representation analysis (ORA) was performed using the enricher function of clusterProfiler package in R with default parameters. The gene ontology terms were obtained from the c5 category of Molecular Signature Database (MSigDBv6.1). Significant GO terms (1% FDR) were identified and further refined to select non-redundant terms. In order to select non-redundant gene sets, we first constructed a GO term tree based on distances (1-Jaccard Similarity Coefficients of shared genes) between the significant terms. The GO term tree was cut at a specific level (h=0.99) to identify clusters of non-redundant gene sets. For a bait with multiple significant terms belonging to the same cluster, we selected the broadest term i.e. largest gene set size.
Virus Interactome Similarity Analysis.
Interactome similarity was assessed by comparing the number of shared human interacting proteins between pathogen pairs, using a hypergeometric test to calculate significance. The background gene set for the test consisted of all unique proteins detected by mass spectrometry across all pathogens (N=10,181 genes).
Orf6 peptide modeling.
The proposed interaction between Orf6 and the NUP98-RAE1 complex was modeled in PyRosetta 4 (release v2020.02-dev61090) using the crystal structure of Vesicular stomatitis virus matrix (M) protein bound to NUP98-RAE1 as a template (PDB 4OWR downloaded from the PDB-REDO server). The M protein chain (C) was truncated after residue 54 to restrict the model to the putative interaction motif in Orf6 (M protein residues 49–54, sequence DEMDTH). These residues were mutated to the Orf6 sequence, QPMEID, using the mutate_residue function in the module pyrosetta.toolbox, without repacking at this initial step. After all six residues were mutated, the full model was relaxed to a low energy conformation using the FastRelax protocol in the module pyrosetta.rosetta.protocols.relax. FastRelax was run with constraints to starting coordinates and scored with the ref2015 score function. The resulting model was inspected for any large energetic penalties associated with the modeled peptide residues or those NUP98 and RAE1 residues interacting with the peptide, and was found to have none. The model was visualized in PyMOL (The PyMOL Molecular Graphics System, Version 2.3.4 Schrödinger, LLC.).
CUL2ZYG11B homology model generation.
The CRL2ZYG11B homology model was built with Swissmodel and Modeller by using the homology template of each domain from PDB database (PDB codes: 4b8o, 5jh5,1g03, and 6r7n). The ZYG11B model has two structured domains: a leucine rich repeat (LRR) and Armadillo Repeat (ARM) at the N and C-terminus respectively. The linker between each domain was not modelled due to high flexibility between residues 32 to 49 and residues 304 to 322. Putative protein interaction surfaces on ZYG11B were modelled based on contiguous surface exposed residues that are conserved in ZYG11B orthologues from C. elegans to H. sapiens (ZY11B_HUMAN; ZY11B_MOUSE; F1M8P2_RAT; ZYG11_XENLA; ZYG11_DANRE; ZYG11_CAEEL) and located at typical substrate binding sites in the homologous structures of LRR and ARM domain co-complexes.
Alignment of Protein E and Histone H2A.
In order to align protein E and histone H2A, the structure of the protein E SARS-CoV homolog (PDB ID: 2MM4) was compared to the human nucleosome structure (PDB ID: 6K1K). Protein E was structurally aligned to the histone subunits using Pymol’s “align” function (https://pymolwiki.org/index.php/Align). Align performs a sequence alignment followed by a structural superposition, and then carries out zero or more cycles of refinement in order to reject structural outliers found during the fit. The best superposition was obtained for H2A residues 49–60 & 63–70 and Protein E residues 25–44 at an RMSD of 2.8Å, as reported in Figure 4d.
Chemoinformatic Analysis of SARS-CoV2 Interacting Partners.
To identify drugs and reagents that modulate the 332 host factors interacting with SARS-CoV-2-HEK293T (MiST >= 0.70), we used two approaches: 1) a chemoinformatic analysis of open-source chemical databases and 2) a target- and pathway-specific literature search, drawing on specialist knowledge within our group. Chemoinformatically, we retrieved 2,472 molecules from the IUPHAR/BPS Guide to Pharmacology (2020–3-12) that interacted with 30 human “prey” proteins (38 approved, 71 in clinical trials), and found 10,883 molecules (95 approved, 369 in clinical trials) from the ChEMBL25 database (Supplementary Tables 5, 6). For both approaches, molecules were prioritized on their FDA approval status, activity at the target of interest better than 1 μM, and commercial availability, drawing on the ZINC database. FDA approved molecules were prioritized except when clinical candidates or preclinical research molecules had substantially better selectivity or potency on-target. In some cases, we considered molecules with indirect mechanisms of action on the general pathway of interest based solely on literature evidence (e.g., captopril modulates ACE2 indirectly via its direct interaction with Angiotensin Converting Enzyme, ACE). Finally, we predicted 6 additional molecules (2 approved, 1 in clinical trials) for proteins with MIST scores between 0.7–0.6 to viral baits (Supplemental Tables 3 and 4). Complete methods can be found here (www.github.com/momeara/BioChemPantry/vignette/COVID19).
Conflicts:
The Krogan Laboratory has received research support from Vir Biotechnology and F. Hoffmann-La Roche. Kevan Shokat has consulting agreements for the following companies involving cash and/or stock compensation: Black Diamond Therapeutics, BridGene Biosciences, Denali Therapeutics, Dice Molecules, eFFECTOR Therapeutics, Erasca, Genentech/Roche, Janssen Pharmaceuticals, Kumquat Biosciences, Kura Oncology, Merck, Mitokinin, Petra Pharma, Qulab Inc. Revolution Medicines, Type6 Therapeutics, Venthera, Wellspring Biosciences (Araxes Pharma). Jack Taunton is a cofounder and shareholder of Global Blood Therapeutics, Principia Biopharma, Kezar Life Sciences, and Cedilla Therapeutics. Jack Taunton and Phillip P. Sharp are listed as inventors on a provisional patent application describing PS3061.
Supplementary Information is available for this paper.
Reprints and permissions information is available at www.nature.com/reprints
The authors have not filed for patent protection on the SARS-CoV-2 host interactions or the use of predicted drugs for treating COVID-19 to ensure all the information is freely available to accelerate the discovery of a treatment.
SUPPLEMENTARY INFORMATION
Supplementary table 1: Scoring results for all baits and all proteins
Supplementary table 2: SARS-CoV 2 high confidence interactors
Supplementary table 3: Literature-derived drugs and reagents that modulate SARS-Cov-2 interactors. Drug-target associations drawn from chemoinformatic searches of the literature, including information about purchasability
Supplementary table 4: Expert-identified drugs and reagents that modulate SARS-CoV-2 interactors. Drug-target associations drawn from expert knowledge of human protein interactors of SARS-Co-V2 and reagents and drugs that modulate them; not readily available from the chemoinformatically-searchable literature
Supplementary table 5: Raw chemical associations to prey proteins IUPHAR/BPS Guide to Pharmacology (2020–3-12)
Supplementary table 6: Raw chemical associations to prey proteins ChEMBL25
Supplementary Methods: Computational methods used to propagate tables and supplemental figures
Supplementary Discussion: In depth look at the SARS-CoV-2 individual bait subnetworks