ABSTRACT:
Many functions in host–microbiota interactions are potentially influenced by intestinal transit times, but little is known about the effects of altered transition times on the composition and functionality of gut microbiota. To analyze these effects, we cultivated the model community SIHUMIx in bioreactors in order to determine the effects of varying transit times (TT) on the community structure and function. After five days of continuous cultivation, we investigated the influence of different medium TT of 12 h, 24 h, and 48 h. For profiling the microbial community, we applied flow cytometric fingerprinting and revealed changes in the community structure of SIHUMIx during the change of TT, which were not associated with changes in species abundances. For pinpointing metabolic alterations, we applied metaproteomics and metabolomics and found, along with shortening the TT, a slight decrease in glycan biosynthesis, carbohydrate, and amino acid metabolism and, furthermore, a reduction in butyrate, methyl butyrate, isobutyrate, valerate, and isovalerate concentrations. Specifically, B. thetaiotaomicron was identified to be affected in terms of butyrate metabolism. However, communities could recover to the original state afterward. This study shows that SIHUMIx showed high structural stability when TT changed—even four-fold. Resistance values remained high, which suggests that TTs did not interfere with the structure of the community to a certain degree. 
METHODS:
2. Materials and Methods 
2.1. Simplified Human Intestinal Microbiota—SIHUMIx
The extended simplified human intestinal microbiota (SIHUMIx) consist of the following eight bacterial strains: Anaerostipes caccae (DSMZ 14662), Bacteroides thetaiotaomicron (DSMZ 2079), Bifidobacterium longum (NCC 2705), Blautia producta (DSMZ 2950), Clostridium butyricum (DSMZ 10702), Clostridium ramosum (DSMZ 1402), Escherichia coli K-12 (MG1655), and Lactobacillus plantarum (DSMZ 20174). Further information on functions fulfilled by SIHUMIx is provided (Table S1). The cultivation protocol, growth conditions, and medium ingredients are provided in Supplementary Material S2.
2.2. Experimental Set-Up
For inoculation of the bioreactor system, the single strain bacteria were thawed from a fresh glycerol stock two weeks before the experiment started and grown in Brain-Heart-Infusion (BHI), as described (Supplementary Material Table S2). Bacteria from three-day-old cultures were counted at the Multi-Sizer 3 (Beckman Coulter, Brea, United States) and used for inoculation. On the day of inoculation (d0) 1 × 109 bacteria per strain (a total of 8 × 109 bacteria per 250 mL) were inoculated into the bioreactor. The continuous cultivation started after 24 h.
The bioreactor run can be divided into three phases: (i) the adaptation phase where the bacterial community was established (d1–d5), (ii) the intermediary phase where the effect of different nutrient flowrates on the community was investigated (d6–d10), and (iii) the last phase in which the varying TTs were set back and the communities were rebalanced (d11–d15). The control bioreactors (labeled as 24 hTTI and II) were run with a dilution rate of 0.04 h−1 (24 h transit time, hTT) during the whole experiment (d1–d15). The dilution rate was calculated as reported in Macfarlane et al., which is equal to the physiological TT of the human colon. In four other bioreactors, dilution rates of 0.04 h−1 were maintained for the adaptation phase and the set-back phase and were set to a dilution rate of 0.08 h−1 (labeled as 12 hTTI and II) and 0.02 h−1 (labeled as 48 hTTI and II), respectively, within the intermediary phase (d6–d10) (Figure 1).
2.3. Sampling and Analysis
During the whole experiment, samples were taken every 24 h starting the day after inoculation (d1). The stability properties of the community structure were analyzed using microbial flow cytometry. Cell numbers were determined with electrical sensing using a Multisizer 3 Coulter Counter (Beckman Coulter, Brea, United States). The community structure and the functionality of SIHUMIx were analyzed using meta-proteomics. After sampling, the bacterial suspensions were centrifuged at 3200× g for 10 min at 4 °C and immediately frozen at −80 °C for subsequent sample analysis or used for the fixation of microbial flow cytometry or dry weight assessment. Supernatants of bacterial pellets were used for functional analysis with targeted metabolomics to perform SCFA profiling.
2.4. Microbial Flow Cytometry
2.4.1. Sample Preparation
The bacterial suspension was centrifuged (3200× g, 10 min, 4 °C) in conic glass tubes. Bacteria were treated with 2% formaldehyde [stock: 8% formaldehyde pH 7, diluted with PBS (6 mM Na2HPO4, 1.8 mM NaH2PO4, and 145 mM NaCl with bi-distilled water, pH 7)] for 30 min. The bacteria were centrifuged and resuspended in 70% ethanol for further fixation and long-term storage at −20 °C.
After a minimum of one day at −20 °C, the samples were stained with 0.24 µM 4′,6-di-amidino-2-phenyl-indole (DAPI, Sigma-Aldrich, St-Louis, USA) overnight, according to Koch et al.. The measurement was performed according to Gelder et al., but with a different neutral density filter (ND 2.6) for the side scatter (SSC) and measuring 250,000 cells in the cell gate (Supplementary Material, Figure S1). Raw cytometric data can be found at  with the flow repository ID: FR-FCM-Z24C.
For flow cytometric analysis and statistical data analysis, FlowJo V10 (FlowJo, LLC, Ashland, USA) was used to visualize each sample in 2D plots using forward scatter (FSC) vs. DAPI fluorescence. The relative cell abundance per gate was exported as .txt and jointly evaluated in R (vegan package). 
2.4.2. Calculation of Stability Properties
The stability properties (i.e., constancy, resistance, and recovery) of SIHUMIx were quantified on the basis of cytometric data. For each bioreactor, constancy was interpreted by a constancy space, which is a multi-dimensional dissimilarity space where the radius is determined by the variation of chosen community states (deviation values determined by Canberra distance, CD). The constancy space was defined using samples from the two 24 hTTI and II using community states from the end of the adaptation phase (day 5) to the end of the experiment (day 15, n = 11), which resembles intrinsic community variation over time. The larger radius of the two constancy spaces from the two control bioreactors (i.e., 24 hTTI, tr = 0.1447, Supplementary Material Figure S2) was used as the threshold value to indicate the highest possible community deviation without TT changes.
Additionally, stability properties were calculated by resistance values (RS) (i.e., the ability of a community to stay unchanged) and recovery values (i.e., the ability of a community to return into the constancy space). For that, the community states at the end of the respective adaptation phases (reference state, SRef, day 5 per bioreactor) were successively compared with the community states during the following days of cultivation. The resulting CD values were used to calculate the resistant behavior and recovery strength of the microbial community following published guidelines. 
2.5. Metaproteomics
2.5.1. Protein Extraction
An amount of 2 mL bioreactor liquid was taken, centrifuged (3200× g, 10 min, 4 °C), and the pellet was dissolved in 1 mL lysis buffer (10 mM Tris-HCl, NaCl 2 mg/mL, 1 mM PMSF, 4 mg/mL SDS). Bacteria were disrupted by bead beating (FastPrep-24, MP Biomedicals, Sanra Ana, CA, USA, 5.5 ms, 1 min, 3 cycles) followed by 15 min at 60 °C (Thermomixer comfort 5355, Eppendorf, Hamburg, Germany) and ultra-sonication (UP50H, Hielscher, Teltow, Germany, cycle 0.5, amplitude 60%). Protein concentration was determined with the bicinchoninic acid assay, according to the user manual (Pierce™ BCA Protein Assay Kit, Thermo Fischer Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA). Furthermore, 100 µg of protein was precipitated overnight at −20 °C with ice-cold acetone 1:5 (v/v) and centrifuged for 10 min at 14,000× g. The pellet was used for sodium dodecyl sulfate poly acryl amid one-dimensional gel electrophorese (SDS–PAGE). SDS-PAGE analysis, in-gel digestion, and protein purification with ZipTip® treatment were performed.
2.5.2. Liquid chromatography mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS) Measurement
An amount of 5 µg peptide lysate was injected into nanoHPLC (UltiMate 3000 RSLCnano, Dionex, Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA). Peptide separation was performed on a C18-reverse-phase trapping column (C18 PepMap100, 300 µm × 5 mm, particle size 5 µm, nano viper, Thermo Fischer Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA), which was followed by a C18-reverse-phase analytical column (Acclaim PepMap® 100, 75 µm × 25 cm, particle size 3 µm, nanoViper, Thermo Fischer Scientific). Mass spectrometric analysis of peptides was performed on a Q Exactive HF mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA) coupled with a TriVersa NanoMate (Advion, Ltd., Harlow, UK) source in the liquid chromatography (LC) chip coupling mode. LC gradient, ionization mode, and the mass spectrometry mode were described.
2.5.3. Data Analysis
Raw data were processed with Proteome Discoverer (v 2.2, Thermo Fischer Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA). The search settings for the Sequest HT search engine were set to Trypsin (Full), Max. Missed Cleavage: 2, precursor mass tolerance: 10 ppm, fragment mass tolerance: 0.02 Da. The protein-coding sequences of the eight SIHUMIx strains were downloaded from UniProt (Available online: ), combined, and used as database resulting in 29,558 protein sequences. Individual *.fasta entries per species are given (Table S3). The false discovery rates (FDR) were determined with the node Percolator embedded in Proteome Discoverer (v 2.2) and we set the FDR threshold at a peptide level of 5%. The same threshold was set for the protein FDR (5%). Redundant proteins from the protein-coding database were automatically grouped in protein groups by applying the strict parsimony principle. Only the protein groups that explain at least one unique identified peptide were reported. Only the peptides that were not shared between different proteins or protein groups were used for the protein quantification through the Top3 approach implemented in the Proteome Discoverer (v 2.2). GhoastKOALA was used to assign KEGG orthology (KO) numbers of KEGG to the identified functions of identified protein sequences. A protein report from Proteome Discoverer with assigned taxa and functional information from KEEG are provided (Supplementary Material S4). Only pathways with sufficient coverage (>10%) on the total amount per sample were used for statistical analysis. For specific pathway abundances, only pathways with sufficient relative abundance (>0.01%) per sample were evaluated. Visualization and statistical analysis were carried out with the GraphPad Prism (v. 8.0.2) using unpaired multiple t-tests per row. A Pearson correlation was performed with in-house written R scripts (Hmisc package using the rcorr function).
2.6. Metabolomics
2.6.1. Metabolite Extraction
For the analysis of short-chain fatty acids (SCFAs), the method of Han et al. was modified. The sample was mixed with acetonitrile to a final concentration of 50% acetonitrile. SCFAs were derivatized with 0.5 volumes of 200 mM 3-nitrophenylhydrazine and 0.5 volumes of 120 mM N-(3-dimethylaminopropyl)-N′-ethylcarbodiimide hydrochloride in pyridine for 30 min at 40 °C. The mix was then diluted 1:50 in 10% acetonitrile.
2.6.2. LC-MS/MS Measurement and Data Analysis 
An amount of 50 µL of the diluted SCFA derivatives was injected into the LC-MS/MS system. Chromatographic separation of SCFAs was performed on an Acquity UPLC BEH C18 column (1.7 µm, Waters, Eschborn, Germany) using H2O (0.01% formic acid, FA) and acetonitrile (0.01% FA) as the mobile phases. The column flow rate was set to 0.35 mL/min and the column temperature was set at 40 °C. The gradient elution was performed as follows: 2 min at 15% B, 15%–50% B in 15 min, and then held at 100% B for 1 min. Lastly, the column was equilibrated for 3 min at 15% B. Mass spectrometric analysis of metabolites was performed QTRAP®5500 (AB Sciex, Framingham, MA, USA). For identification and quantitation, a scheduled multiple reaction monitoring (MRM) method was used, with specific transitions for every SCFA. Peak areas were determined in Analyst® Software (v. 1.6.2, AB Sciex) and areas for single SCFAs were exported. Normalization and statistics were performed with in-house written R scripts.