ABSTRACT:
Background
Rice is a major crop worldwide. Bacterial blight (BB) caused by Xanthomonas oryzae pv. oryzae (Xoo) has become one of the most devastating diseases for rice. It has been clear that phosphorylation plays essential roles in plant disease resistance. However, the role of phosphorylation is poorly understood in rice-Xoo system. Here, we report the first study on large scale enrichment of phosphopeptides and identification of phosphosites in rice before and 24 h after Xoo infection.
Results
We have successfully identified 2367 and 2223 phosphosites on 1334 and 1297 representative proteins in 0 h and 24 h after Xoo infection, respectively. A total of 762 differentially phosphorylated proteins, including transcription factors, kinases, epi-genetic controlling factors and many well-known disease resistant proteins, are identified after Xoo infection suggesting that they may be functionally relevant to Xoo resistance. In particular, we found that phosphorylation/dephosphorylation might be a key switch turning on/off many epi-genetic controlling factors, including HDT701, in response to Xoo infection, suggesting that phosphorylation switch overriding the epi-genetic regulation may be a very universal model in the plant disease resistance pathway.
Conclusions
The phosphosites identified in this study would be a big complementation to our current knowledge in the phosphorylation status and sites of rice proteins. This research represents a substantial advance in understanding the rice phosphoproteome as well as the mechanism of rice bacterial blight resistance.
Electronic supplementary material
The online version of this article (doi:10.1186/s12870-015-0541-2) contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.
METHODS:
Methods
Plant materials and growth conditions
Rice plants of IRBB5 (xa5) and IRBB13 (xa13) were obtained from National Rice Research Institute (CNRRI). IRBB5 (xa5) and IRBB13 (xa13) were two near-isogenic rice lines with a single gene used to characterize virulence of Xanthomonas oryzae pv. oryzae (Xoo) isolates in China. IRBB5 (xa5) and IRBB13 (xa13) seedlings were grown in the net house of CNRRI. The cultivation and management of the rice in the net house proceeded as usual.
Rice bacterial blight inoculation
IRBB5 and IRBB13 plants were inoculated with the Chinese representative strain of Xoo (Zhe173) at the booting stage by the leaf clipping method. The concentrations of Xoo suspension is up to 3x108 cfu/mL. Disease was scored (3 to 5 leaves for each plant) as the percent lesion area (lesion length/leaf length) at ten days after inoculation.
Total protein extraction
After inoculation, around 5 cm long IRBB5 leaves close to the clip position were collected immediately after Xoo inoculation (0 h) and at 24 h after inoculation (24 h). The total proteins were extracted using the urea-extraction method. Three individual biological replicates were used for each time point. Briefly, 1 gram of rice leaf tissue was grinded into fine powder, lysed with 5 mL lysis buffer (150 mM Tris pH8.0, 8 M urea, 1X phosphoprotein protease inhibitor complex, and 1 mM phenylmethylsulfonyl fluoride) by shaken for 30 min at 4 °C, and sheared by sonication (80 W in power, sonicate 10 s, stop 15 s to cool down, repeat 10 times). After centrifugation at 10,000 rpm for 15 min, the supernatant was aliquoted, and the proteins were precipitated in 100 % acetone, washed in 75 % ethanol and resolved in the lysis buffer. Lastly, the extracted total proteins were quantified with Bradford assay.
Western blot analysis
The time-course phosphoprotein differences of IRBB5 inoculated Xoo were analyzed by Western blot using biotinylated Phos-tag™ zinc (II) complex (Wako). Firstly, the extracted total proteins were resolved on 10 % SDS-polyacrylamide gels, and subsequently transferred onto polyvinylidene fluoride fluoropolymer (PVDF) membrane using an electrophoretic blotting system (Bio-Rad). Then, the 500 μL solution which contains 10 μL Phos-tag™ BTL111, 20 μL 10 mmol/L Zn(NO3)2 and 1 μL streptavidin-conjugated horseradish peroxidase is centrifuged for 20 min (13,000 rpm) in a centrifugal filter device cup (NMWL = 30,000, NanosepTM 30 K, Pall Life Sciences). The rest solution is incubated with PVDF membrane in 30 mL TBST buffer (10 mM Tris, 100 mM NaCl and 0.1 % tween-20) for 1 h at room temperature. Lastly, the complexes on the membrane were detected by enhanced chemiluminescence (Pierce) method.
Protein digestion
Protein were first reduced with 5 mM DTT in 56 °C for 30 min, then cold to room temperature, and alkylated with 20 mM IAA in dark for 30 min, at last added 5 mM DTT in dark for 15 min. The reduced and alkylated proteins were digested on the 30 kDa filter unit (Millipore) over night with trypsin at pH8.0 (with an enzyme to protein ratio of 1:50). Peptides obtained by filter-aided sample preparation (FASP) were desalted using C18 Sep-Pak (Waters).
Phosphopeptide enrichment
The digested peptides were resolved with binding buffer (80 % ACN, 5 % TFA, 1 M lac acid), then incubated with TiO2 beads (GL sciences, peptide to TiO2 ratio of 1:4) for three times, each time for 30 min then washed with binding buffer for twice. Transfer all TiO2 beads into a 200 mL homemade StageTip that with two pieces of C18 solid phase extraction disk (3 M), phosphopeptides were washed by elution buffer (40 % ACN, 15 % NH3H2O) for 4 times. Eluates were subsequently dried to ~5ul in a SpeedVac and reconstituted with 5 % MeOH in 1 % TFA solution for LC-MS/MS analysis.
LC-MS/MS and data analysis
Peptides were separated by using a homemade reversed-phase column (75umID x 15CM) and eluted in a 1 h 5-30 % acetonitrile gradient with an Easy-nLC1000 liquid chromatography system (Thermo), analyzed by Q Exactive Plus (Thermo). Spectral data were then searched against rice database in Proteome Discoverer 1.3 suites with Mascot software. The rice database downloaded from the website (ftp://ftp.plantbiology.msu.edu/pub/data/Eukaryotic_Projects/o_sativa/annotation_dbs/pseudomolecules/version_7.0/all.dir/). The mass tolerance was set to be 20 ppm for precursor, and it was set 50mmu for the tolerance of product ions. Oxidation (M), Acetyl (Protein-N term), and Phospho (S/T/Y) was chosen as variable modifications, Carbamidomethyl (C) as fixed modification, and one missed cleavage on trypsin was allowed. To screen out the reliable phosphopeptides, FDR (False discovery rates) were assessed using the Percolator tool within the Protein Discoverer package. The results were filtered for peptide rank 1 and high identification confidence, corresponding to 1 % false discovery rate. Low-scoring peptides (Mascot score ≤20) were excluded from the analysis when they were not further supported by additional high-scoring identifications in other replicates or experiments. For reliable phosphorylation site analysis, all phosphopeptide hits were automatically re-analyzed by the phosphoRS software within the Protein Discoverer software suite. PhosphoRS probability higher than 90 % was required for a phosphorylation site to be considered as localized. Only those peptides which were phosphorylated in at least two of the three biological replicates were considered as truly phosphorylated. The differentially phosphorylated protein was defined to have over two fold changes in the normalized average intensity with credible student’s t-test (P < 0.05).
Quantitative RT-PCR (qRT-PCR)
Total RNA of IRBB5 leaves at 24 h after inoculation was isolated using Trizol (Invitrogen) according to the manufacturer’s manual. Two micrograms of total RNA was performed for reverse transcription using first strand cDNA synthesis Kit (Toyobo). For real-time quantitative RT-PCR, all the primers used are listed in Additional file 5: Table S5, and ubiquitin gene was used as an internal control. Quantitative PCR was performed in a total reaction volume of 20 microliter (10 μl THUNDERBIRD SYBR® qPCR Mix (Toyobo), 1 μl cDNA, 1 μl primers, and 8 μl water) on the LightCycler 4.80 real-time PCR detection system (Roche). Expression was assessed by evaluating threshold cycle (CT) values. The relative expression level was calculated by the 2-ΔΔCT method. The experiment was performed in three replicates.
Availability of supporting data
The mass spectrometry proteomics data have been deposited to the ProteomeXchange Consortium via the PRIDE partner repository with the dataset identifier PXD002222.
Additional files