ABSTRACT:
Background
Colorectal cancer is the third most common and the fourth most lethal cancer in the world. In the majority of cases, patients are diagnosed at an advanced stage or even metastatic, thus explaining the high mortality. The standard treatment for patients with locally advanced non-metastatic rectal cancer is neoadjuvant radio-chemotherapy (NRCT) with 5-fluorouracil (5-FU) followed by surgery, but the resistance rate to this treatment remains high with approximately 30% of non-responders. The lack of evidence available in clinical practice to predict NRCT resistance to 5-FU and to guide clinical practice therefore encourages the search for biomarkers of this resistance.
Methods
From twenty-three formalin-fixed paraffin-embedded (FFPE) biopsies performed before NRCT with 5-FU of locally advanced non-metastatic rectal cancer patients, we extracted and analysed the tumor proteome of these patients. From clinical data, we were able to classify the twenty-three patients in our cohort into three treatment response groups: non-responders (NR), partial responders (PR) and total responders (TR), and to compare the proteomes of these different groups.
Results
We have highlighted 384 differentially abundant proteins between NR and PR, 248 between NR and TR and 417 between PR and TR. Among these proteins, we have identified many differentially abundant proteins identified as having a role in cancer (IFIT1, FASTKD2, PIP4K2B, ARID1B, SLC25A33: overexpressed in TR; CALD1, CPA3, B3GALT5, CD177, RIPK1: overexpressed in NR). We have also identified that DPYD, the main degradation enzyme of 5-FU, was overexpressed in NR, as well as several ribosomal and mitochondrial proteins also overexpressed in NR. Data are available via ProteomeXchange with identifier PXD008440.
Conclusions
From these retrospective study, we implemented a protein extraction protocol from FFPE biopsy to highlight protein differences between different response groups to RCTN with 5-FU in patients with locally advanced non-metastatic rectal cancer. These results will pave the way for a larger cohort for better sensitivity and specificity of the signature to guide decisions in the choice of treatment.
Electronic supplementary material
The online version of this article (10.1186/s12014-018-9192-2) contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.
METHODS:
Methods
Study design and clinical protocol
This is a retrospective study. The eligibility includes all patients diagnosed between September 2013 and September 2015 in the Centre Hospitalier Universitaire de Sherbrooke (Québec, Canada) with a pathologically confirmed locally advanced rectal adenocarcinoma (T3–T4, any N, M0/any T, N1–N2, M0), treated by standard neoadjuvant radiotherapy and chemotherapy followed by the surgery. All participants gave informed consent before enrolment in this study. The radiotherapy is composed by 45 Gy in 25 fractions, 5 days per week for 5 weeks, ± 5.4 Gy boost by 3D technique. The concomitant chemotherapy was performed by 1600 mg/m2 intravenous 5-FU or oral capecitabine (Fig. 1a). All secondary effects were reviewed and noted according to the Common Terminology Criteria for Adverse Events (CTCAE) version 4.0. The TNM stage before the treatment (iTNM) was used according to the routine clinical examination including magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) for all cases (Table 1) and the post-treatment TNM stage (ypTNM) was defined according to the report of pathology (Table 3). The cancer stage was finally defined according to the American Joint Committee on Cancer (AJCC). The tumor tissues of initial biopsy were used for the study. Patients were then classified into three distinct groups depending on their pathologic response to treatment evaluated with the AJCC tumor regression grading (TRG) system. TRG0 corresponds to a complete regression (non-viable cancer cells), TRG1 corresponds to a near complete regression (single or small groups of tumor cells), TRG2 corresponds to a moderate regression (residual cancer outgrown by fibrosis) and TRG3 corresponds to a minimal/absent regression (minimal or no tumor cells killed). For the sake of clarity, we have associated TRG0 to the total responders (TR), TRG1 and TRG2 to the partial responders (PR) and TRG3 to the non-responders (NR). The study was approved by ethic committee of Cancer Research Center, CHUS (CRC-CHUS). Patients monitoring was performed on a regular basis to index recurrences. 
Biopsy sample collection
Biopsies were collected, rapidly fixed in formalin and sent to the pathology laboratory of the Centre Hospitalier Universitaire de Sherbrooke (Québec, Canada), according to the clinical pathological process. They have undergone washings (alcohols and solvents) in order to be degreased and dehydrated before their inclusion in paraffin. Cuts of approximately 3 μm in thickness were made on the paraffin blocks and analysed after staining with haematoxylin and eosin (H&E stain). The areas of interest were selected by the pathologist (Fig. 2a) and punches were made on the paraffin blocks (Fig. 2b) using a Tissue Microarray (TMA) Master II (3DHISTECH) (Fig. 1b). 
Proteomic study
Dewaxing and homogenisation of the FFPE biopsies
100% xylene was added (100 µl for 1 mg of biopsy) for 1 h under agitation. Xylene is replaced by 50% ethanol to dehydrate the biopsy for 1 h under agitation. After dehydration, FFPE biopsies were homogenised in MS grade water (300 µl for 1 mg of remaining biopsy) using a TissueRuptor (Qiagen). Biopsies were then incubated in 2.5% SDS, 50 mM Tris pH 7.5, 10 mM dithiothréitol at 98 °C for 1 h. After centrifugation at 13,000 rpm for 1 min, the supernatant was collected (Fig. 1c).
Concentration, reduction and alkylation
Solubilised biopsies were concentrated (250–50 µl) using Nanosep 3 K Omega (Pall Life Sciences) and treated with 1X Laemmli and 2 mM dithiothréitol at 98 °C for 5 min (reduction). 50 mM iodoacetamide was added for 30 min and incubated in the dark for alkylation (Fig. 1c).
In-gel separation and tryptic digestion
50 µg of concentrated biopsies were separated on NuPAGE gel 4–12% bis–Tris 1.5 mm × 10 well (Invitrogen). After migration, the gel was stained with Coomassie Blue (SimplyBlue SafeStain) for 1 h under agitation and then discoloured overnight under agitation. Each lane was divided into four gel slices. Each gel slice was cut into cubes (ca. 1 × 1 mm) and transferred in microcentrifuge tube. Then, they were washed with MS grade water for 15 min under agitation then with 50% acetonitrile for 15 min under agitation until gel slice shrunk and became opaque. The gel slices were then subjected to a wash cycle (20 mM ammonium bicarbonate for 15 min under agitation and 20 mM ammonium bicarbonate/100% acetonitrile (1:1, vol/vol) for 15 min under agitation) until the gel became clear. The samples were then dehydrated by washing with 100% acetonitrile for 5 min under agitation until the precipitate became white and solid. Acetonitrile was removed and dehydrated samples were digested in 12.5 ng/ml Trypsin Gold (Promega) modified in 50 mM acetic acid and 20 mM ammonium bicarbonate, at 37 °C overnight under agitation (Fig. 1c).
Peptides extraction
After the tryptic digestion, the supernatant was collected in a new microcentrifuge tube. Digested samples were next incubated with 100% acetonitrile (volume equal to the digestion volume in the previous step) for 30 min at 37 °C under agitation. The supernatant was collected and digested samples underwent two incubations in 1% formic acid for 20 min at 37 °C under agitation for extracting peptides from gel. The samples were then dehydrated by washing with 100% acetonitrile for 10 min at 37 °C under agitation until the precipitate became white and solid.
Peptides desalting
Peptides were resuspended in 30 µl of 0.1% trifluoroacetic acid. With a C18 column Zip-Tip (Thermo Scientific) previously washed with 100% acetonitrile and 0.1% trifluoroacetic acid, peptides were loaded into the column by doing 10 up and down, washed with 0.1% trifluoroacetic acid and eluted with 30 µl of 50% acetonitrile/1% formic acid by doing up and down in a new microcentrifuge tube. Desalted peptides were then dried in a speedvac and resuspended in 1% formic acid (Fig. 1c).
High performance liquid chromatography separation, coupled to mass spectrometry (HPLC–MS/MS)
Trypsin-digested purified peptides were separated using a Dionex Ultimate 3000 nanoHPLC system. 2 µg of the sample in 1% formic acid (v:v) were loaded with a constant flow of 4 µL/min on an Acclaim PepMap100 C18 column (0.3 mm id × 5 mm). After trap enrichment, peptides were eluted in a PepMap C18 nanocolumn (75 µm × 50 cm) with a linear gradient of 5–35% solvent B over 240 min with a constant flow of 200 nL/min.
Mass spectrometry analysis
The HPLC system was coupled to an OrbiTrap QExactive mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific Inc) via an EasySpray source. The spray voltage was set to 2.0 kV and the temperature of the column was set to 40 °C. Full scan MS survey spectra (m/z 350–1600) in profile mode were acquired in the Orbitrap with a resolution of 70,000 after accumulation of 1,000,000 ions. The ten most intense peptide ions from the preview scan in the Orbitrap were fragmented by collision induced dissociation (normalized collision energy 35% and resolution of 17,500) after the accumulation of 50,000 ions. Maximal filling times were 250 ms for the full scans and 60 ms for the MS/MS scans. Precursor ion charge state screening was enabled and all unassigned charge states as well as singly, 7 and 8 charged species were rejected. The dynamic exclusion list was restricted to a maximum of 500 entries with a maximum retention period of 40 s and a relative mass window of 10 ppm. The lock mass option was enabled for survey scans to improve mass accuracy.
Quantification and bioinformatics analysis
Data were processed, searched and quantified using the MaxQuant software package version 1.5.2.8 with the protein database from UniProtKB (Homo sapiens, 16/07/2013, 88,354 entries). The following settings were used for the MaxQuant analysis: 2 miscleavages allowed; fixed modification was carbamidomethylation on cysteine; enzyme was trypsin (K/R not before P); variable modifications included in the analysis were methionine oxidation and protein N-terminal acetylation; mass tolerance of 7 ppm for precursor ions and 20 ppm for fragment ions. We performed quantification based on protein intensities. First, we calculated the sum of the protein intensities obtained for each biopsy. We then divided these protein intensities sums by the lowest protein intensity sum of the cohort to obtain a ratio. Each protein intensity for each biopsy was then normalized to this ratio so that the sums of the protein intensities for each biopsy were equal. Finally, the analysis of mass spectrometry data were next carried out with the Perseus software package and subjected to a normalization (z-score) and an ANOVA statistical test (comparison of the three groups) or Student’s T test (comparison of two groups), both corrected with a p value of 0.05. The mass spectrometry proteomics data have been deposited to the ProteomeXchange Consortium via the PRIDE partner repository with the dataset identifier PXD008440.
Statistical analysis
The different groups of patients were first compared according to clinicopathological parameters. Due to a small number of patients per group, Fisher’s exact test was done with the R software. When the p value was less than 0.05, the result was considered to have statistical significance.