ABSTRACT:
Cerebrospinal fluid is investigated in biomarker studies for various neurological disorders of the central nervous system due to its proximity to the brain. Currently, only a limited number of biomarkers have been validated in independent studies. The high variability in the protein composition and protein abundance of cerebrospinal fluid between as well as within individuals might be an important reason for this phenomenon. To evaluate this possibility, we investigated the inter- and intraindividual variability in the cerebrospinal fluid proteome globally, with a specific focus on disease biomarkers described in the literature. Cerebrospinal fluid from a longitudinal study group including 12 healthy control subjects was analyzed by label-free quantification (LFQ) via LC-MS/MS. Data were quantified via MaxQuant. Then, the intra- and interindividual variability and the reference change value were calculated for every protein. We identified and quantified 791 proteins, and 216 of these proteins were abundant in all samples and were selected for further analysis. For these proteins, we found an interindividual coefficient of variation of up to 101.5% and an intraindividual coefficient of variation of up to 29.3%. Remarkably, these values were comparably high for both proteins that were published as disease biomarkers and other proteins. Our results support the hypothesis that natural variability greatly impacts cerebrospinal fluid protein biomarkers because high variability can lead to unreliable results. Thus, we suggest controlling the variability of each protein to distinguish between good and bad biomarker candidates, e.g., by utilizing reference change values to improve the process of evaluating potential biomarkers in future studies.
METHODS:
Materials and methods
Ethical statement
The ethics committee of the Physician's Board Hessen, Germany (approval no. FF89/2008) approved this study, which is registered at the German Register for Clinical Trials (DRKS00000540) according to the WHO Trial Registration Data Set. All participants provided written, fully informed consent to participate in this study. The relevant documents relating to this process are archived at Paracelsus-Elena-Klinik in Kassel, Germany. Only the anonymous data and materials from the participants were provided to the scientists carrying out the research. The data concerning this study were stored separately from the hospital charts of the patients.
Subjects and samples
This CSF core proteome study has a longitudinal design with 12 human subjects evaluated at three different time points. The subjects were selected as previously described by Mollenhauer et al.. These 12 healthy subjects are a representative group of 90 neurologically unimpaired healthy subjects who are participating in the longitudinal DeNoPa study (de Novo Parkinson study), which is a prospective, single center study performed as described by Mollenhauer et al.. All subjects (volunteer CSF donors) were recruited at Paracelsus-Elena-Klinik in Kassel, Germany. The subjects were not eligible for the study if they demonstrated cognitive impairment (Mini-Mental State Examination score < 27) or any other neurological disease. A neurologist evaluated qualified subjects according to a standardized assessment protocol, including a neurological examination and MRI, among tests (S1 Table). This examination was repeated at every time point (T0, T24, T48) for every subject. No subject showed symptoms of any neurological disease. Further, routine laboratory blood analysis was carried out. Blood was collected with BD Vacutainer system tubes (BD, Franklin Lakes, NJ, USA) by venous puncture and processed according to published standard operating procedures (SOPs) between 7 and 9 a.m. after 12 hours fasting. Aliquots were stored at -80 °C within 30 min following the venous puncture.
Characteristics of the study group
The age and gender characteristics of our study group are shown in Table 1. The median age of human subjects was 65 at the beginning of the study, with 39.1% of the subjects being female. The mean time between each of the follow-up assessments (T0 (first), T24 and T48) was two years. Routine blood and CSF laboratory analyses were performed to exclude severe diseases that can affect CSF. Furthermore, blood contamination of CSF was clinically assessed by the erythrocyte count. In some samples, slight contamination from blood was found (0 to 64 erythrocytes, median: 0) but were negligible, as described by Reiber. Otherwise, no significant deviations related to default values were revealed in the routine laboratory analysis of the CSF. With all the tests and information, the selected study group covered all characteristics necessary for our study.
CSF sampling for routine laboratory analysis and mass spectrometric analysis
CSF was obtained from the subarachnoid space of the lumbar spinal cord by lumbar puncture. Sampling was performed as described by Mollenhauer et al.. Routine clinical variables were determined using established routine protocols (Table 2 and S2 Table). The CSF was centrifuged at 2,500 x g for 10 min at room temperature, and the supernatant was collected for further analysis. The time between obtaining the sample and the centrifugation step was under 30 min. Within 30 min, the samples were stored in aliquots at -80 °C until further analysis.
CSF sample preparation for mass spectrometric analysis
Before performing mass spectrometric analysis, protein digestion of the CSF samples was performed according to the protocol published by Stoop et al. with slight modifications. In short, CSF samples (50 μL) were incubated 1:1 with 0.2% (s/v) RapiGest SF Surfactant (Waters Corporation, Milford, MA, USA) (in 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate). Proteins were reduced with 5 mM dithiothreitol (final concentration) at 60 °C for 30 min. Next, iodoacetamide was added for alkylation (final concentration of 15 mM), and the samples were incubated at room temperature for 30 min in the dark. Tryptic digestion was performed at 37 °C overnight (16 hours) at a 1:50 (w/w) trypsin-to-protein ratio. Digestion was stopped by adding 25% (v/v) trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) for a final concentration of 0.5% (v/v). After incubation at 37 °C for 40 min, the samples were centrifuged (Centrifuge 5417R, Rotor: FC45-30-11, Eppendorf AG, Hamburg, Germany) at 17,000 x g and 4 °C for 10 min. Clear supernatants of the samples were transferred into new reaction tubes and dried with a rotational vacuum concentrator (SpeedDry RVC 2–25 CDplus, Martin Christ Gefriertrocknungsanlagen GmbH, Osterode, Germany). Finally, samples were resuspended in 0.1% (v/v) TFA. The peptide concentration was measured by amino acid analysis, as described by Plum et al..
Mass spectrometric analysis
Protein digests were analyzed on a nanoHPLC system (UltiMate 3000, Dionex, Idstein, Germany) coupled on-line to a quadrupole orbitrap mass spectrometer (Q Exactive, Thermo Fisher Scientific, Bremen, Germany). Samples were injected into the nanoHPLC system by an autosampler and were loaded on a C18 trap column (PepMap100 C18, 100 μm ID x 2 cm, particle size 5 μm and pore size 100 Å; Thermo Scientific, Rockford, IL, USA) using 0.1% (v/v) TFA and a flow rate of 30 μL/min. After sample loading, the trap column was switched to an analytical C18 column (PepMap C18, 75 μm x 50 cm, particle size 5 μm and pore size 100 Å; Thermo Scientific, Rockford, IL, USA). For peptide separation, the following solvent system was used: buffer A: 0.1% (v/v) formic acid; buffer B: 84% (v/v) acetonitrile, 0.1% (v/v) formic acid. A linear gradient of 4–50% buffer B was carried out for 180 min at a flow rate of 400 nL/min, followed by a washing step with 95% B for 5 min and an equilibration step with 5% B for 5 min. The column oven temperature was set to 60 °C. Ionization took place in a nano electrospray ionization source (ESI), and mass spectrometric analysis was performed in data-dependent scan mode. For MS/MS analysis, full MS spectra were scanned in the range from 350–1,400 m/z with a resolution of 70,000 at 200 m/z (automatic gain control (AGC) target 2e6, 80 ms maximum injection time). The spray voltage was set to 1,600 V, and the capillary temperature was set to 250 °C. For internal recalibrations, the lock mass polydimethylcyclosiloxane (m/z: 445.120) was used. The 10 ions with the highest intensities were selected for higher energy collision-induced dissociation (HCD) fragmentation. MS/MS fragments were generated with a 27% normalized collision energy, an isolation window of 2.2 m/z and a fixed first mass of 130 m/z. An orbitrap analyzer with a resolution of 35,000 at 200 m/z (AGC 5e5, maximum injection time 120 ms) was used for fragment analysis. For the assessment of the analytical variability, seven replicates of pooled samples were measured.
Protein quantification
Mass spectrometric data were analyzed with the intensity-based quantification software MaxQuant (version 1.5.3.12). MS/MS spectra were searched against the UniProt/Swiss-Prot human proteome database (UniProtKB/Swiss-Prot UniProt release 2017_01; downloaded 2017-01-26; number of entries 553,474) using the search engine Andromeda; the search included 262 common contaminants and concatenated with the reversed versions of all sequences. The precursor and fragment ion mass tolerance were set to 5 ppm and 20 ppm, respectively. The enzyme specificity was set to trypsin, and two missed cleavages were allowed. The minimum peptide length was set to 7 amino acids. Cysteine carbamidomethylation was set as fixed, and methionine oxidation and N-terminal acetylation were set as variable modifications. A maximum of 5 modifications per peptide was set. For both peptide spectrum matches (PSMs) and protein level, the false discovery rate (FDR) was set to 1%. For the calculation of the protein abundances, label-free quantification (LFQ,) was performed with an LFQ minimum ratio count of two. Normalized LFQ intensities were used for further data analysis.
Mathematical calculation of the variation in protein abundance
For each protein, its CV is defined as the ratio of the standard deviation (s) to the mean () in %: 
In this paper, several types of CVs are used. First, to assess the analytical variability or inaccuracy, CVa can be calculated using the standard deviation and mean of repeated measurements of the same sample. To this end, in this paper, 4 technical replicates were used. Second, for each subject, protein abundances were measured at three different time points (i.e., T0, T24 and T48), and for each protein, a CV for the three abundances was calculated. The median of these CVs across all samples is called CVt and represents the intraindividual variability over time. Finally, to obtain the measured interindividual CV between different subjects (CVg), the mean and the standard deviation of the protein abundances across all samples at T0 are used in formula (1) to obtain CVg.
The reference change value (RCV) describes the change in the protein abundance (e.g., a potential protein biomarker) in % that is added to the original abundance (i.e., 100%) and is necessary to reflect an ‘“unexpectedly high” change, i.e., a change that is unlikely to occur based only on the analytical, inter- or intraindividual variability and might be biologically relevant (e.g., a potential protein biomarker). The original formula is given in (2):  with CVi standing for the intraindividual biological CV given by 
The factor 1.96 corresponds to a 95% confidence level assuming a normal distribution. By inserting formula (3) into formula (2), CVa2 is canceled out, and the square root vanishes. Therefore, the formula for the RCV can be simplified to 
This RCV is called RCVt because it uses CVt and applies to the intraindividual variability. We modify the definition for RCVg by exchanging CVt for CVg in order to reflect “unexpectedly high” changes between different individuals: 
Generally, the RCV is always larger than zero, and in order to compare the RCV to fold changes, the original abundance (i.e., 100%) needs to be added so that (RCV + 100%)/100% has to be considered. Then, whether a fold change is unexpectedly high can be assessed. For a CVg value of 50%, the following RCVg can be calculated:  
Consequently, for this example, the fold change should be larger than 2.39 to reflect an “unexpectedly high” change in protein abundance.