ABSTRACT:
A cell line representative of human high-grade serous ovarian cancer (HGSOC) should not only resemble its tumour of origin at the molecular level, but also demonstrate functional utility in pre-clinical investigations. Here, we report the integrated proteomic analysis of 26 ovarian cancer cell lines, HGSOC tumours, immortalized ovarian surface epithelial cells and fallopian tube epithelial cells via a single-run mass spectrometric workflow. The in-depth quantification of >10,000 proteins results in three distinct cell line categories: epithelial (group I), clear cell (group II) and mesenchymal (group III). We identify a 67-protein cell line signature, which separates our entire proteomic data set, as well as a confirmatory publicly available CPTAC/TCGA tumour proteome data set, into a predominantly epithelial and mesenchymal HGSOC tumour cluster. This proteomics-based epithelial/mesenchymal stratification of cell lines and human tumours indicates a possible origin of HGSOC either from the fallopian tube or from the ovarian surface epithelium.
 High-grade serous ovarian cancer is the most common and aggressive ovarian cancer, with uncertain cell of origin. Here, the authors undertake a mass spectrometric analysis of 26 cancer cell lines and identify a protein signature that classifies ovarian cancer tissues into epithelial and mesenchymal groups.
METHODS:
Methods
Patient samples
All patient samples were collected at the University of Chicago Medical Center, with approval from the Institutional Review Board. All the patients provided informed consent.
Frozen tumour samples
Ovarian tumours from five chemo-naive patients with serous-papillary high-grade, FIGO Stage IIIB/C, OvCa were collected by EL under an IRB-approved protocol at the University of Chicago during the primary debulking surgery or laparoscopy before neo-adjuvant treatment. In some cases, tumours were collected from both ovaries (n=3 patients). Tumours were immediately snap frozen and stored at −80 °C until sample processing for MS analysis. Serous histology was confirmed by two gynaecologic pathologists (A.M., R.R.L.).
Primary FTEC isolation
Fallopian tubes were removed from three patients with benign gynaecological conditions not affecting the fallopian tube. Primary fallopian tube secretory epithelial cells (FTECs) were isolated and cultured as previously described.
Cell lines
Thirty cell lines were included in this study; their sources and respective media are detailed in Supplementary Data 3. All the cell lines were genotyped to confirm their authenticity; cell lines were authenticated by using the commercial service CellCheck (IDEXX Bioresearch). The samples were confirmed to be of human origin and no mammalian inter-species contamination was detected. The alleles for nine short tandem repeat markers were determined and the results were compared with the profiles from DSMZ, ATCC, JCRB and RIKEN short tandem repeat databases. All the cell lines were mycoplasma-negative. The cells were grown under recommended culture conditions and the samples were collected from three consecutive passages for n=3 replicates for each line.
Sample preparation for MS analysis
Cell lysis was performed in lysis buffer (4% SDS, 10 mM Hepes pH 8.0) at 99 °C for 10 min and by 15 min sonication (level 5, Bioruptor, Diagenode). HGSOC tissues were first homogenized in lysis buffer using an Ultra Turbax blender. Proteins in the lysate were reduced with 10 mM DTT for 30 min and alkylated with 55 mM iodoacetamide for an additional 30 min. Remaining SDS detergent was removed by acetone precipitation. Briefly, acetone (−20 °C) was added to 100 μg of proteins to a final concentration of 80% v/v and the proteins were precipitated overnight at −20 °C. After centrifugation (15 min, 4 °C, 16,000 g), the detergent-containing supernatant was removed and the protein pellet was washed with 80% acetone (−20 °C). Protein pellets were then resolved in 100 μl 6 M urea/2 M thiourea (in 10 mM Hepes pH 8.0) and digested with 1 μg of LysC for 3 h at room temperature. After adding four volumes of 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate, 1 μg trypsin was added and tryptic digestion carried out overnight. The next day, digestion was stopped by adding 1% TFA. Peptides were finally desalted on C18 StageTips and kept at −20 °C until MS analysis.
Liquid chromatography-MS analysis
MS analysis was performed using Quadrupole Orbitrap mass spectrometers (Q Exactive and Q Exactive HF, Thermo Fisher Scientific, Rockford, IL, USA) coupled to an EASY-nLC 1000 HPLC system (Thermo Fisher Scientific) via a nano electrospray source. Columns (75 μm inner diameter, 50 cm length) were in-house packed with 1.9 μm C18 particles (Dr Maisch GmbH, Germany). Peptides were separated over a 250 min gradient from 2% to 60% (5 min to 5%, 180 min to 25%, 45 min to 35%, 20 min to 60%) in buffer B (80% acetonitrile, 0.5% formic acid) at 200 nl min−1. The column temperature was constantly set to 50 °C by using an in-house-made column oven. The survey scans (300 to 1,650 m/z) were acquired with a resolution of 70,000 (60,000 for Q Exactive HF), at m/z 200. A top-five method was used to select up to the five most abundant precursor ions with a charge ≥2. Selected precursor ions were subjected to high-energy collisional dissociation fragmentation at a normalized collision energy of 25 (27 for Q Exactive HF), an isolation window of 2.2 Th (1.4 Th for Q Exactive HF) and a resolution of 17,500 at m/z 200 (15,000 for Q Exactive HF). For survey scans, ion injections times were set to 20 ms (target value 3E6) and 120 ms (target value 1E5) for MS/MS scans. Dynamic exclusion of sequenced peptides was set to 30 s. Data were acquired using Xcalibur software (Thermo Scientific).
MS data analysis
MS raw files were analysed with MaxQuant software (version 1.5.0.38). MS/MS-based peptide identification was carried out with the Andromeda search engine in MaxQuant. Briefly, Andromeda uses a target-decoy approach to identify peptides and proteins at an FDR <1%. As a forward database, the human UniProtKB database (Oct 2014) was used. A reverse database for the decoy search was generated automatically in MaxQuant. Enzyme specificity was set to ‘Trypsin', and a minimum number of seven amino acids were required for peptide identification. Default settings were used for variable and fixed modifications (variable modification, acetylation (N terminus) and methionine oxidation; fixed modification, carbamidomethylation). Proteins and protein isoforms that could not be discriminated by unique peptides were grouped into protein groups. For label-free protein quantification, the MaxLFQ algorithm was used as part of the MaxQuant environment. Briefly, quantitative information was retrieved on the basis of high-resolution three-dimensional peptide profiles in mass-to-charge, retention time and intensity space. The algorithm first calculated pairwise protein ratios by taking the median of all pairwise peptide ratios per protein. Only shared identical peptides were considered for each pairwise comparison. A minimum number of one ratio count was required for each pairwise comparison. To retrieve quantitative information for all possible sample comparisons, a least-squares analysis was used to reconstruct the relative abundance profile for each protein. This step preserved the total summed intensity for a protein over all the samples. To maximize the number of quantification events across samples, we enabled the ‘Match Between Runs' option in MaxQuant, which allowed the quantification of high-resolution MS1 features that were not identified in each single measurement.
Isobaric tag for relative and absolute quantification (ITRAQ)-based TCGA proteome raw files (PNNL study) generated by the Clinical Proteomic Tumor Analysis Consortium (NCI/NIH) were downloaded from the CPTAC data portal (https://cptac-data-portal.georgetown.edu/cptacPublic/) and analysed with MaxQuant. Logarithmic reporter intensities were normalized against the control reporter channel (channel 117, pooled sample of 84 TCGA ovarian tumour tissue samples) and each sample median normalized before data analysis.
Statistical analysis
All statistical and bioinformatics analyses were performed using the freely available software Perseus (as part of the MaxQuant environment) or the R framework. Proteins identified only by site modification or found in the decoy reverse database were not considered for data analysis. For the analysis of LFQ cell line data, we first filtered out proteins that were only quantified in one of three replicates and took the average expression per cell line for the remaining protein quantifications. To calculate protein level variability across cell lines (standard deviation of MaxLFQ intensity, Fig. 2b) we required a minimum of 10 quantified values. Pathway enrichment analysis for categorical data (Fig. 2e) was performed based on a Fisher's exact test with a Benjamini–Hochberg FDR threshold of 0.02. GOBP, GOCC, KEGG and Uniprot Keyword annotations were used for enrichment analysis and required a minimum category size of at least four proteins. For numerical data such as protein expression fold change between two groups (Fig. 6b) we used a one-dimensional enrichment analysis with a Benjamini–Hochberg FDR threshold of 0.02. For hierarchical clustering of cell lines (Fig. 3a), a minimum of 10 valid values (one-third of all samples) was required. Missing values were imputed on the basis of a normal distribution (width=0.15, down-shift=1.8). MaxLFQ intensities were first z-scored and the samples clustered according to Spearman rank correlations as a distance measure for column and row clustering.
We used the classification framework implemented in Perseus and, in particular, SVMs combined with feature selection methods to identify a subset of proteins that act as strong discriminators between the three cell line groups. This should allow deeper insight into the underlying biological processes, while keeping the selected subset small enough to allow follow-up studies (Supplementary Fig. 2, Fig. 4c,d).
The SVMs implementation in Perseus is an adaptation of the well-established and commonly used LIBSVM library, which uses sequential minimal optimization to solve the quadratic problems during model training. We used a One-versus-All implementation of SVMs classification, which resulted in three distinct ranked lists of proteins—one for each of the cell line groups. Feature selection was embedded in a cross-validation procedure to avoid overfitting and random sampling using 85% of the data for training and the other 15% for testing; this was repeated 250 times. Proteins were ranked by the P value computed using a modified test statistic with an s0=4 parameter. For the final list of 67 discriminating proteins, the top-ranked ones from each of the three ranked lists that offered a good tradeoff between minimal sets and the smallest error rates were combined (Group I, 53 proteins; Group II, 10 proteins; Group III, 10 proteins; with six proteins overlapping). This feature selection method resembles that of a domain expert (biologist) selecting a small subset of proteins that can conveniently be followed up. Furthermore, the required large differences between the groups should allow more robust classification in a clinical setup. The method is conceptually analogous to the standard analysis of variance test and, in fact, performing analysis of variance identifies the selected proteins as significantly differentially expressed. However, using feature selection avoids the need for an FDR cutoff and allows for selecting smaller subsets.
For PCA of cell lines, primary cells and HGSOC tissues (Fig. 4b), we first filtered out the roughly 200 most abundant plasma proteins. A minimum number of 30 valid values out of 41 was required, resulting in 6,649 proteins. Missing values were imputed as described above.
For the clustering of ITRAQ and label-free data (Fig. 5a,b, Supplementary Fig. 5), z-scoring was performed group-wise for ITRAQ and label-free data.
For pairwise comparison of proteomes (Fig. 6b), a two-sided t-test statistic was used, including a permutation-based FDR of 5% and an s0 value of 2.
ATRA treatment and proliferation assay
The following cell lines were treated (or untreated) with 7 μM ATRA daily for 7 days in 96-well plates: SNU119, TYKNU, KURAMOCHI, HEYA8, PEO4, 59M, SKOV3IP1 and COV318. On day 8, MTT assays were carried out. Proliferation rates were calculated for ATRA-treated and untreated cells and plotted as percentage relative to untreated cells.
Western blot
The cells were grown in six-well plates and treated with 7 μM ATRA daily for 7 days. The cell lysates were collected in RIPA buffer and 20 μg protein was electrophoresed on 4–20% resolving gels. The following antibodies were used in western blots: anti-rabbit ITGA5 (1/1,000 dilution, #sc-10729, Santa Cruz Biotechnology, Dallas, TX, USA), anti-rabbit PAX8 (1/1,000 dilution, #9857, Cell Signaling Technology, Danvers, MA, USA), anti-rabbit CRABP2 (1/3,000 dilution, #PA5-27451, Thermo Fisher Scientific) and anti-rabbit GAPDH (1/1,000 dilution, #2118, Cell Signaling Technology).
Immunofluorescence
Formalin-fixed paraffin-embedded HGSOC and normal tissue sections (5 μm) were deparaffinized in xylene and rehydrated in graded alcohol solutions. One FFPE section of normal (OSE and FTEC) or tumour (omental tumour and fallopian tube tumour) tissue was used for immunofluorescence. Antigen retrieval was carried out in 0.01 M sodium citrate buffer with 0.05% Tween 20 (pH 6.0) for 30 min at 95 °C. Briefly, slides were washed 3 × with PBS, blocked with 10% goat serum in phosphate-buffered saline/0.05% Tween (PBST), and incubated overnight with anti-rabbit CRABP2 antibody (1:200 dilution, #PA5-27451, Thermo Fisher Scientific) or anti-mouse p53 (1:200 dilution, pantropic, #OP42, Millipore, Billerica, MA, USA). Following five PBST washes, sections were incubated with Alexa Fluor 488 goat anti-rabbit IgG (1:500 dilution, #A11008, Thermo Fisher Scientific) or Alexa Fluor 647 goat anti-mouse IgG (1:500 dilution, #A21235, Thermo Fisher Scientific) and Hoechst (1/200 dilution, #H1399, Thermo Fisher Scientific) for 1 h, washed 5 × with PBST, 2 × with PBS, and mounted with Prolong Gold Antifade Reagent (P36934, Molecular Probes, Thermo Fisher Scientific). The images were obtained with a Zeiss 510 LSM confocal microscope, using the LSM 510 software. As a negative control, the primary antibody was omitted for one section in each set of samples.
Data availability
The mass spectrometry proteomics data have been deposited to the ProteomeXchange Consortium (http://proteomecentral.proteomexchange.org/cgi/GetDataset) via the PRIDE partner repository with the data set identifier PXD003668. The data set is also accessible via the user-friendly MaxQB database (http://maxqb.biochem.mpg.de/mxdb/project/list). All other data supporting the findings of this study are available within the article and its Supplementary Information files or from the corresponding author upon reasonable request.
Additional information
How to cite this article: Coscia, F. et al. Integrative proteomic profiling of ovarian cancer cell lines reveals precursor cell associated proteins and functional status. Nat. Commun. 7:12645 doi: 10.1038/ncomms12645 (2016).