ABSTRACT:
Proteomes were measured from human heart biopsies from right atria, left atria and left ventricle of seven male patients with mitral valve regurgitation at a depth of ∼7000 proteins. Results were confirmed in an independent set of biopsies from three individuals. Comparative analysis against data from post-mortem samples showed greatly enhanced quantitative power and confidence level in samples collected from living hearts. Our analysis, combined with data from genome wide association studies, suggest candidate gene associations to mitral valve prolapse.
Graphical Abstract
Highlights
Proteomes measured from human heart biopsies collected in-vivo covers >7000 cardiac proteins and highlight hundreds of chamber-specific molecular signatures that meaningfully reflect the specialized functions of the respective chambers.
Protein quantification from freshly collected biopsies is preferential to necropsy samples because of unspecific post-mortem protein degradation in the latter.
Increased abundances of proteins associated with sustained atrial fibrillation are not a sufficient condition to generate the disease state.
Protein abundance differences between atria and ventricle primarily originate at the level of gene regulation and reflect a functional need.
Genetic and genomic research has greatly advanced our understanding of heart disease. Yet, comprehensive, in-depth, quantitative maps of protein expression in hearts of living humans are still lacking. Using samples obtained during valve replacement surgery in patients with mitral valve prolapse (MVP), we set out to define inter-chamber differences, the intersect of proteomic data with genetic or genomic datasets, and the impact of left atrial dilation on the proteome of patients with no history of atrial fibrillation (AF).
We collected biopsies from right atria (RA), left atria (LA) and left ventricle (LV) of seven male patients with mitral valve regurgitation with dilated LA but no history of AF. Biopsy samples were analyzed by high-resolution mass spectrometry (MS), where peptides were pre-fractionated by reverse phase high-pressure liquid chromatography prior to MS measurement on a Q-Exactive-HF Orbitrap instrument. We identified 7,314 proteins based on 130,728 peptides. Results were confirmed in an independent set of biopsies collected from three additional individuals. Comparative analysis against data from post-mortem samples showed enhanced quantitative power and confidence level in samples collected from living hearts. Our analysis, combined with data from genome wide association studies suggested candidate gene associations to MVP, identified higher abundance in ventricle for proteins associated with cardiomyopathies and revealed the dilated LA proteome, demonstrating differential representation of molecules previously associated with AF, in non-AF hearts.
This is the largest dataset of cardiac protein expression from human samples collected in vivo. It provides a comprehensive resource that allows insight into molecular fingerprints of MVP and facilitates novel inferences between genomic data and disease mechanisms. We propose that over-representation of proteins in ventricle is consequent not to redundancy but to functional need, and conclude that changes in abundance of proteins known to associate with AF are not sufficient for arrhythmogenesis.
METHODS:
MATERIALS AND METHODS
For full description of materials and methods, please see the Supplementary Materials.
Experimental Design and Statistical Rationale
Our study is based on seven biological replicates of biopsy samples from three cardiac chambers (LA, RA, LV). Based on 21 samples fractionated into 12 fractions before MS analysis, a total of 252 MS measurements were performed. No technical replicates were performed. MS measurements of each fraction were performed back-to-back in order to minimize technical variability within each measured fraction, and at the same time distribute technical variability evenly across biological replicates. Our results were validated against an independent cohort of three biological replicates from each cardiac chamber where sample acquisition, laboratory workflow and MS measurements were performed completely independently form the original cohort. The number of biological replicates was chosen based on sample availability from the clinic.
Statistical significance of differential protein expression across chambers was determined by volcano plot analysis based on a permutation-based false-discovery rate (FDR) cutoff. This FDR approach employs a combination of Student's t test p value and fold-change enrichment to determine whether a protein is deemed significant, because both low p values and high fold changes are indicative of a biologically important finding.
Tissues and Peptide Preparation
Tissue biopsies were collected from LA, RA and LV of patients undergoing mitral valve surgery. Tissue samples were snap-frozen in a container with liquid nitrogen while still in the operating room. All patients gave informed consent to the procedure prior to operation and the procedure conform with the principles outlined in the Declaration of Helsinki. Frozen tissue biopsies were homogenized on a Precellys24 homogenizer (Bertin Technologies, France) in tissue incubation buffer (50 mm Tris-HCl pH 8.5, 5 mm EDTA, 150 mm NaCl, 10 mm KCl, 1% Triton X-100, 5 mm NaF, 5 mm beta-glycerophosphate, 1 mm Na-orthovanadate, containing 1× Roche complete protease inhibitor) with ceramic beads (2.8 and 1.4 mm zirconium oxide beads, Precellys). Homogenates were incubated for 2 h at 4 °C (20rpm), centrifuged (15,000 × g, 20 min, 4 °C) and soluble fractions transferred to chilled 1.5 ml tubes. Protein was precipitated and resuspended in Guanidine-HCl buffer (Gnd-HCl; 6MGnd-HCl, 50 mm Tris HCl pH 8.5, 5 mm NaF, 5 mm beta-glycerophosphate, 1 mm Na-orthovanadate, containing 1× Roche complete protease inhibitor). Disulfide bridges were reduced and cysteine moieties alkylated by addition of 5 mm Tris(2-carboxyethyl)phosphine (TCEP) and 10 mm chloroacetamide (CAA) and incubation in the dark at room temperature for 15 min. Up to 1 mg protein was digested in-solution by addition of endoproteinase Lys-C (Trichem ApS, Denmark; 1:100 enzyme/protein ratio) for 1.5 h at 30 °C, 750 rpm in the dark, followed by dilution (1:12 with 50 mm Tris-HCl pH8) and digestion with trypsin overnight (14h) at 37 °C, 750rpm (Life technologies, 1:100 enzyme/protein ratio). Reactions were quenched by trifluoroacetic acid. Soluble fractions were desalted and concentrated on C18 SepPak columns (Waters, MA).
Offline High pH Fractionation of Peptide Samples
Of each sample, 50–100 μg peptide (in 10 μl injection volume) was fractionated by micro-flow reverse-phase ultrahigh pressure liquid chromatograpy (UPLC) on an Dionex UltiMate 3000 UPLC system (Thermo Scientific) equipped with an ACQUITY UPLC CSH C18 Column (130Å, 1.7 μm, 1 mm × 150 mm) at 30 μl/min flow rate, essentially as previously described. Outflow was collected in 1-min intervals into 12 concatenated fractions in the autosampler.
LC-MS/MS Measurements
Fractionated peptide samples were analyzed by online reversed-phase liquid chromatography coupled to a Q-Exactive HF quadrupole Orbitrap tandem mass spectrometer (LC-MS/MS, Thermo Electron, Bremen, Germany). Peptide samples were brought to concentration of 0.2 μg/μl (diluted in 5% ACN, 0.1% TFA) in 96-well microtiter plates and autosampled (5 μl injection volume) into a nanoflow Easy-nLC system (Proxeon Biosystems, Odense, Denmark). Peptide samples were separated on 15 cm fused-silica emitter columns pulled and packed in-house with reversed-phase ReproSil-Pur C18-AQ 1.9 μm resin (Dr. Maisch GmbH, Ammerbuch-Entringen, Germany) in a 1 h multi-step linear gradient (0.1% formic acid constant; 2–25% ACN in 45 min, 25–45% ACN in 8min, 45–80% ACN in 3 min) followed by short column re-equilibration (80–5% ACN in 5 min, 5% ACN for 2 min). Column effluent was directly ionized in a nano-electrospray ionization source operated in positive ionization mode and electrosprayed into the mass spectrometer.
Full-MS spectra (375–1500 m/z) were acquired after accumulation of 3,000,000 ions in the Orbitrap (maximum fill time of 25 ms) at 120,000 resolution. A data-dependent Top12 method then sequentially isolated the most intense precursor ions (up to 12 per full scan) for higher-energy collisional dissociation (HCD) in an octopole collision cell. MS/MS spectra of fragment ions were recorded at resolution of 30,000 after accumulation of 100,000 ions in the Orbitrap (maximum fill time of 45 ms).
Data Analysis
Raw MS data was processed using the MaxQuant software version 1.5.3.30 (Max-Planck Institute of Biochemistry, Department of Proteomics and Signal Transduction, Munich) and proteins identified with the built-in Andromeda search engine. All peptides were used for protein quantification, and label-free quantification (LFQ) was performed in MaxQuant with fast LFQ option enabled. Protein identification results were further processed using the Perseus software suite.
To remove minor technical variation between samples, quantile normalization of raw intensities was performed based on the Bioconductor R package LIMMA.