ABSTRACT:
Initially thought to be a means for cells to eliminate waste, secreted extracellular vesicles, known as exosomes, are now understood to mediate numerous healthy and pathological processes. Though abundant in biological fluids, purifying exosomes has been challenging because their biophysical properties overlap with other secreted cell products. Easy-to-use commercial kits for harvesting exosomes are now widely used, but the relative low-purity and high-cost of the preparations restricts their utility. Here we describe a method for purifying exosomes and other extracellular vesicles by adapting methods for isolating viruses using polyethylene glycol. This technique, called ExtraPEG, enriches exosomes from large volumes of media rapidly and inexpensively using low-speed centrifugation, followed by a single small-volume ultracentrifugation purification step. Total protein and RNA harvested from vesicles is sufficient in quantity and quality for proteomics and sequencing analyses, demonstrating the utility of this method for biomarker discovery and diagnostics. Additionally, confocal microscopy studies suggest that the biological activity of vesicles is not impaired. The ExtraPEG method can be easily adapted to enrich for different vesicle populations, or as an efficient precursor to subsequent purification techniques, providing a means to harvest exosomes from many different biological fluids and for a wide variety of purposes.
METHODS:
Methods
Cell culture
Human embryonic kidney 293T cells (HEK293T; ATCC® CRL-11268™) were cultured in Dulbecco’s Modified Eagle’s Medium (DMEM; Lonza, 12-604Q). Medium was supplemented with either 0, or 10% fetal bovine serum (FBS; Seradigm, 1400–500) depleted of extracellular vesicles by centrifugation at 100,000 g (average relative centrifugal force) for 20 hr (4 °C). Cultures were incubated at 37 °C in an atmosphere supplemented with 5% carbon dioxide prior to collecting the media containing secreted extracellular vesicles. Cells were monitored daily for changes in growth rate, and in the proportion of live to dead cells to minimize production of other extracellular vesicle populations such as apoptotic bodies. In our hands, two million cells seeded into a 150 mm plate grew uniformly with consistent viability for up to four days (in 20 mL of complete growth media, with 10% vesicle-depleted FBS). Viability was determined by staining cells with AOPI (Nexcelom Bioscience, CS2-0106) and using an automated cell counter (Cellometer Vision, software version 2.1.4.2, Nexcelom Biosciences). For each experiment, harvested media from multiple flasks was pooled before distributing it into different sample groups.
For enrichment of vesicles for mass spectrophotometry analysis, HeLa cells (ATCC® CCL-2™) were cultured as described above. After two days of growth, the complete medium was aspirated and cells were washed once with PBS warmed to 37 °C. To reduce contamination from serum proteins in the vesicle isolates, cells were cultured for a subsequent two days in serum-free medium.
Differential centrifugation and sucrose cushion methods for enriching extracellular vesicles
Vesicles were harvested using a differential centrifugation method commonly used for enriching exosomes, i.e.: conditioned media harvested from cell cultures was first centrifuged for five minutes at 500 g, to remove cells and larger debris. Media was then transferred to a new tube, and centrifuged at 2,000 g for ten minutes to remove cell debris and larger vesicles, such as apoptotic bodies. Large microvesicles were depleted by centrifugation at 10,000 g for 30 minutes. The media was then added to 35 mL polypropylene centrifuge tubes (Beckman Coulter Inc., #326823) in 35 mL aliquots, and centrifuged at 100,000 g (average relative centrifugal force) for 70 minutes using the SW-28 swing-bucket rotor in an Optima XL-100K ultracentrifuge (Beckman Coulter Inc.). Pelleted vesicles were suspended in 1 mL of PBS by gently vortexing, followed by agitating on an orbital shaker. The concentrated vesicle suspension was then centrifuged again in 1 mL polypropylene tubes (Beckman Coulter Inc., #347287) in an Optima MAX-E tabletop ultracentrifuge using a TLA120.2 rotor (Beckman Coulter inc.) to further purify the vesicles and facilitate re-suspension of the pellet in a small volume of PBS (50–100 μL). PBS was analyzed by NTA prior to suspension of vesicles and confirmed to contain particle numbers below the detection threshold of the instrument. The pellet was dissolved in particle free PBS by gentle vortexing followed by agitating on an orbital shaker for 15 to 30 minutes at room temperature until the solution was transparent and free of all aggregates. Samples were frozen at −80 °C until being further analyzed by nanoparticle tracking (see below) and protein quantification. All centrifugation steps were conducted at 4 °C. A subset of samples were processed as above, however, after centrifugation of the samples at 10,000 g, they were further centrifuged over a 30% sucrose cushion, as described by Thery et al., to enhance the purity of the enrichment. Briefly, four milliliters of sucrose solution was layered into 35 mL centrifugation tubes below a less-dense culture media layer. After centrifugation at 100,000 g for 75 min, 3.5 mL of the cushion (now containing the vesicles) was aspirated by piercing the tube and extracting with a 18-gauge syringe, carefully leaving any contaminants of greater, or lesser density. The 3.5 mL sucrose solution was then suspended in 31.5 mL PBS, and centrifuged a subsequent time at 100,000 g for 70 minutes to remove the sucrose. The purified pellet was re-suspended as described for the differential centrifugation procedure.
Preparation of polyethylene glycol solution for precipitation of extracellular vesicles
Polyethylene glycol is commonly used to concentrate virus particles. With this in mind, we modified and repurposed a well-reproduced method for virus enrichment in order to concentrate vesicles of comparable size and biochemical properties. Polyethylene glycol with Mn (number average molecular weight) of 6000 (Sigma, 81260) was combined with filtered water (18.3 Mega-ohm system; ELGA Purelab flex purification system) and sodium chloride (1 M) to make a two-fold concentrated (2x) stock solution. The 2x stock solution was added to an equal volume of substrate from which vesicles were to be harvested (see below). Concentrations between 5 and 15% were evaluated (2x stock solutions of 10 and 30% PEG, respectively) for the ability to recover particles between 40 and 1,000 nm, and vesicles containing exosome markers. Sodium chloride concentration was held constant at 0.5 M in all precipitation solutions.
The concentrated PEG stock solution was analyzed by nanoparticle tracking (see below) prior to use. Additionally, mock vesicle enrichments were conducted to ensure that no particles were generated by the reagents alone from the enrichment process. In both cases, particle numbers recovered were insignificant and below the reproducible threshold of instruments.
Polyethylene glycol enrichment of extracellular vesicles
Vesicle-containing medium from cell culture was centrifuged at 500 g for five minutes followed by 2,000 g for thirty minutes at 4 °C to remove cellular debris and large apoptotic bodies. Once centrifuged, the media was added to an equal volume of a 2× PEG solution at 4 °C, to achieve a desired final PEG concentration (5–15%). After the 2× PEG solution was added, samples were mixed thoroughly by inversion, and incubated at 4 °C overnight (at least 12 hrs). The next day, samples were centrifuged in a tabletop centrifuge at maximum speed (Eppendorf, model 5810 R using an S-4-104 swing bucket rotor; 3,214 g) for 1 hour at 4 °C. Conical tubes were then decanted, and allowed to drain for five minutes, tapping occasionally to remove excess PEG. The resulting pellet was suspended in 50–500 μL of particle-free PBS (pH 7.4). Subsets of samples were then either stored at −80, or further purified by PEG-precipitation for a second time using a lower concentration of PEG, or by re-suspending in PBS and centrifuging at 100,000 g to wash and re-pellet the vesicles. For the former group of samples, the pellet resulting from the primary PEG treatment was diluted in 5 mL PBS. An equal volume of 2× PEG solution was added, this time to a lower final PEG concentration of 5%. The latter samples were suspended in 1 mL PBS and ultracentrifuged (100,000 g) for 70 minutes to wash the particles of contaminating protein and PEG. All samples were finally resuspended in particle-free PBS, by shaking at room temperature for up to 30 minutes.
Enrichment of exosomes with polyethylene glycol-based commercial products
Two commercially available methods were used to enrich extracellular vesicles: the Total Exosome IsolationTM (TEI) reagent from Life Technologies, and ExoQuick-TC™ from SBI. Vesicles were enriched according to the manufacturers’ instructions. For the TEI procedure, pooled media was aliquoted into 50 mL conical tubes and centrifuged at 2,000 g for 30 minutes. Supernatant was transferred to new tubes, and 0.5 volumes of TEI reagent was added and mixed thoroughly, before incubating overnight at 4 °C. The next day, samples were centrifuged at 10,000 g for 1 hour and the supernatant was then aspirated. The resulting pellet was suspended in PBS as described above. For the ExoQuick isolation, samples were drawn from the same pool of media (described above), and centrifuged in 50 mL conical tubes at 3,000 g for 15 minutes. The supernatant was added to a new tube, 1 mL of ExoQuick reagent was added for every 5 mL of culture media, and samples were mixed and incubated overnight at 4 °C (for at least 12 hours). Following this incubation, the suspension was centrifuged at 1,500 g for 30 minutes. Supernatant was then aspirated, followed by a brief centrifugation step (1,500 g for 5 min) to facilitate its further removal. The pellet was suspended as described above.
Nanoparticle tracking analysis
To determine particle size and concentration, nanoparticle tracking analysis (NTA) was performed using the NanoSightTM LM10-HS (Malvern Instruments) instrument configured with a blue (488 nm) laser and sCMOS camera. Samples (stored at −80 °C) were thawed and gently vortexed before further diluting in sterile, particle-free PBS at ratios of between 1:250 and 1:2,000 to achieve particle concentrations consistent with the optimal range of analysis with the software (between 2 × 10^8 and 1.8 × 10^9 particles per mL). PBS was tracked before each experiment to ensure that it was particle-free. Samples were manually mixed three times by aspirating and expelling the diluted particle suspension using a 1 mL syringe. Each sample was then injected into the laser chamber. Three 60-second recordings were performed for each sample and technical replicates were averaged. Camera shutter speed was fixed at 30.00 milliseconds. The NTA 3.0 software was used to measure the mode and mean size, and the concentration of particles per 1 mL solution. Camera level was set to 13, and detection threshold was maintained at 3 to ensure accurate and consistent detection of small particles. The laser chamber was cleaned thoroughly between each sample reading with particle-free water and 70% ethanol.
Transmission electron microscopy
Following ExtraPEG, DC and sucrose cushion methods, exosome-enriched isolates were resuspended in 50–100 μL of sterile filtered PBS for electron microscopy imaging. Sample preparation was done according to Lasser et al..
Protein quantification, western blots, and antibodies
Exosomes were lysed by adding an equal volume of a urea-containing strong lysis buffer to the vesicles suspended in PBS. This lysate was agitated at room temperature for 15 minutes on a mechanical shaker. The concentration of protein was assessed using the EZQ™ Protein Quantitation Kit (Life Technologies, R-33200), and 1.7–8.0 μg of protein was loaded into 4–20% sodium dodecyl sulfate polyacrylamide gels (Lonza, #59111). For western blotting, proteins were transferred to a nitrocellulose membrane (GE Healthcare, #10600002). The membranes were blocked with 5% (weight/volume) nonfat dry milk powder suspended in a standard tris-buffered saline solution with tween 20 (TBST), either overnight at 4 °C or for one hour at room temperature. Membranes were then probed for exosome proteins using up to four antibodies: TSG101 (Santa Cruz Biotechnology; SC-7964), HSC70 (Santa Cruz Biotechnology; SC-7298), CD63 (Santa Cruz Biotechnology; SC-15363), and ALIX (Santa Cruz Biotechnology; SC-49268). These primary antibodies were subsequently probed with appropriate secondary antibodies conjugated to horseradish peroxidase. Enhanced chemiluminescent (ECL) HRP substrate was added for picogram (Thermo Scientific, #1856136) or femtogram (Amresco, 1B1583) protein detection thresholds. Chemiluminescence was detected using the LAS4000 luminescent image analyzer and software Version 8.1 of Image Quant-TL (GE Healthcare Life Sciences). Cropped blot images were compiled from either trimmed segments of a single nitrocellulose membrane that were probed for different proteins, or from different blots where protein molecular weights overlapped. In the latter case, blots to be combined were run under identical conditions using aliquots of the same sample stocks.
Mass spectrometry analysis
HeLa cell vesicles were harvested using the ExtraPEG method (8% PEG + wash), and lysed. Recovered protein was quantified using the EZQ quantification kit, and 6.5 μg of protein was purified by tris-glycine sodium dodecyl sulfate polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis (SDS-PAGE). Protein was run into the 4–20% polyacrylamide gel slowly, at 50 volts for approximately 25 min. The gel was fixed and incubated in a Coomassie Brilliant Blue G-250 based stain, imaged, and regions containing protein (protein was run approximately 1 cm into the gel lanes) were excised. The gel pieces containing protein were subdivided into 1 mm3 pieces before placing into microcentrifuge tubes (1 tube per sample). They were then washed with 1 mL of HPLC grade water, and destained by shaking in 500 μL of 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate and 50% methanol for ten minutes (repeated until gel cubes appeared clear). The cleared gel pieces were subsequently washed with 1.2 mL of 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate in 50% acetonitrile for five minutes with shaking, followed by dehydration in 100% acetonitrile for one minute. Samples were then further desiccated by vacuum centrifugation for five minutes. The dehydrated gel pieces were re-suspended in 400 μL of a reducing solution containing 25 mM dithiothreitol in 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate and incubated at 56 °C for 20 min with gentle shaking. Reduction was followed by alkylation of samples by removing reducing solution and adding the same volume of 55 mM iodoacetamide in 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate. Samples were incubated in the dark for 20 min. Iodoacetamide was removed, and samples were washed with 1 mL of ultra-pure water by vortexing. After two more washes, water was removed and gel pieces were slowly dehydrated by adding 1,000 μL of 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate in 50% acetonitrile, followed by a subsequent incubation in an equal volume of 100% acetonitrile, and desiccation by vacuum centrifugation as before. Finally, gel pieces were cooled on ice, and rehydrated with Trypsin Gold protein digest enzyme (Promega, V5280) suspended in ProteaseMAX™ Surfactant Trypsin Enhancer (Promega, V2071) according to the manufacturer’s recommendations. The digestion reaction solution with extracted peptides was aspirated and placed into new tubes. Peptides were snap-frozen on dry ice and dried completely in the vacuum centrifuge at room temperature. Samples were then submitted to the Translational Science Laboratory at Florida State University for tandem mass spectrometry analysis. Liquid chromatography tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS) analysis was done using an externally calibrated Thermo LTQ Orbitrap Velos nLC-ESI-LIT-Orbitrap (high-resolution electrospray tandem mass spectrometer) with parameters set as previously described. Raw data files produced were loaded into Proteome Discoverer™ Software (Thermo Fisher Scientific Inc.) and database searches were conducted for each technical replicate with Sequest HT and Mascot (version 2.4.0) using the UniProt Knowledge Base Swiss-Prot Homo Sapiens database. This reference database was appended with sequences of common contaminants of proteomics studies to minimize false positive identifications. Contaminant sequences in the common Repository of Adventitious Proteins (cRAP) were downloaded from the Global Proteome Machine website. Files (.msf) were then loaded into Scaffold Proteome Software (Scaffold PTM 2.2.0) and data was analyzed using a false protein discovery rate of 1.0% with a minimum of two peptides required for identification. The mass spectrometry proteomics data have been deposited to the ProteomeXchange Consortium via the PRIDE partner repository with the dataset identifier PXD003209.
Exosome enrichment from bodily fluids
To confirm the utility of ExtraPEG in isolating vesicles from biological fluids, de-identified human cerebral spinal fluid, urine, and saliva were purchased from BioreclamationIVT (Hicksville, New York). BioreclamationsIVT declares all samples were collected under IRB approved protocols. Mouse plasma was generously donated by Dr. James Olcese (Florida State University). All mouse samples were obtained under a Florida State University Animal Care and Use Committee approved protocol. Vesicles were enriched from biological samples using the ExtraPEG method and quantified using nanoparticle tracking analysis.
Stable cell line generation
HEK293 cells stably expressing CD63-GFP were generated by lentivirus transduction and puromycin selection using pCT-CD63-GFP (Systems Biosciences Inc.). Medium containing lentivirus particles was harvested from HEK293-T cells transfected with pCT-CD63-GFP and packaging plasmids pMD2.G (Addgene, #12259), pRSV-Rev (Addgene #12253), and psPAX2 (Addgene #12260, kind gifts from Dr. Didier Trono) at 48 hr post-transfection. Medium was then centrifuged for 10 min at 1,000 g and filtered through a 0.45 μM filter. HEK293 cells were incubated with the resulting lentivirus-containing medium and a 10 μg/mL final concentration of Polybrene (Sigma, #9268). Following 24 hr of incubation, the medium was replaced with complete DMEM for 24 hr and then puromycin was added at a final concentration of 2 μg/mL. Cells were subcultured for three weeks under puromycin selection to eliminate non-transduced cells.
Exosome uptake assay
One hundred fifty millimeter dishes of HEK293 or HEK293-expressing CD63-GFP cells were grown in medium containing 5% exosome-depleted FBS for 48 hr. The conditioned medium was harvested using the ExtraPEG or DC method described above, and the resulting exosome pellets were re-suspended in 1 mL of DMEM containing 5% exosome-depleted FBS and incubated with HEK293 cells grown on glass cover slips in 35 mm dishes. Twenty-four hours post incubation with exosome-containing medium the cells were wasted twice with PBS and fixed with 4% paraformaldehyde for 10 min at room temperature. The fixed cells were washed three times with PBS, stained with a 1:10,000 dilution of DAPI (4′,6-diamidino-2-phenylindole; 1 mg/mL stock, Thermo Fisher Scientific Inc.) in PBS, and mounted on glass slides with a drop of mounting media (4% propyl gallate and 90% glycerol in PBS). Confocal images were obtained with a 63X objective on a Zeiss LSM 880 microscope and processed using the Zen 2 (Blue edition, V2.0.0.0; Zeiss) software package.
Quantitation of total exosome RNA
Exosomes from HEK293T cells were enriched by differential centrifugation and ExtraPEG method (8% PEG + wash). RNA was extracted using Invitrogen’s Total Exosome RNA and Protein Isolation kit (#4478545) according to the manufacturer’s recommendations: exosome pellets were re-suspended in phosphate buffered saline, denatured, and RNA was purified by acid-phenol/chloroform extraction. As a control, RNA from HEK293T cell lysate was similarly purified. Concentrations of 2,500 picograms per microliter were loaded onto an Agilent 6000 pico chip and total RNA was quantitated using an Agilent 2100 Bioanalyzer. Gel-like images and electropherograms were generated by Agilent 2100 Expert Software (version B.02.08.SI648).
Statistical analysis
Statistical analyses were performed using Stata 10 data analysis and statistical software (Stata Corp LP). All sample populations evaluated were compared with Bartlett’s test for equal variance. Differences between two groups were assessed using Student’s t-test (two-tailed) or the Wilcoxon rank-sum test where appropriate. Comparisons of three or more groups were conducted using a one-way ANOVA, with the Bonferroni multiple comparison procedure. Significance of linear regression models and population comparisons was set to α = 0.05. Proteomics analysis was conduction using Vesiclepedia (http://www.microvesicles.org/) and Exocarta (http://www.exocarta.org/) databases of extracellular vesicle and exosome contents, respectively. Only human proteins from these databases were used for comparison to the proteins identified in this study. Venn diagrams were generated with BioVenn and Adobe Illustrator CS6 (Adobe Systems Inc.).
Additional Information
How to cite this article: Rider, M. A. et al. ExtraPEG: A Polyethylene Glycol-Based Method for the Enrichment of Extracellular Vesicles. Sci. Rep. 6, 23978; doi: 10.1038/srep23978 (2016).