ABSTRACT:
Muscle strength declines with aging and increasing physical activity is the only intervention known to attenuate this decline. In order to adequately investigate both preventive and therapeutic interventions against sarcopenia, a better understanding of the biological changes that are induced by physical activity in skeletal muscle is required. To determine the effect of physical activity on the skeletal muscle proteome, we utilized liquid-chromatography mass spectrometry to obtain quantitative proteomics data on human skeletal muscle biopsies from 60 well-characterized healthy individuals (20–87 years) who reported heterogeneous levels of physical activity (not active, active, moderately active, and highly active). Over 4,000 proteins were quantified, and higher self-reported physical activity was associated with substantial overrepresentation of proteins associated with mitochondria, TCA cycle, structural and contractile muscle, and genome maintenance. Conversely, proteins related to the spliceosome, transcription regulation, immune function, and apoptosis, DNA damage, and senescence were underrepresented with higher self-reported activity. These differences in observed protein expression were related to different levels of physical activity in daily life and not intense competitive exercise. In most instances, differences in protein levels were directly opposite to those reported in the literature observed with aging. These data suggest that being physically active in daily life has strong and biologically detectable beneficial effects on muscle.
METHODS:
Materials and Methods
Study Design and Participants
Muscle biopsies analyzed in this study were collected from participants from the genetic and epigenetic study of aging and laboratory testing (GESTALT). Potential participants were enrolled in GESTALT if they met the IDEAL (Insight into the Determination of Exceptional Aging and Longevity) criteria; namely if the participants were free of major diseases, except for controlled hypertension or a history of cancer that had been clinically silent for at least 10 years, were not chronically medicated (except one on antihypertensive medication), had no physical or cognitive impairments, had a BMI less than 30 kg/m2, and were not professional athletes. Details regarding IDEAL criteria are reported elsewhere and includes information on medical history, physical exams, and blood tests results that were collected and interpreted by a trained nurse practitioner. Participants were admitted to 3 days of testing at the Clinical Research Unit of the National Institute on Aging Intramural Research Program. Overall, data and muscle specimens from 60 participants were available for this study. However, two participants were excluded because the muscle specimen provided was too small to obtain reliable proteomic data. Therefore, data from 58 participants dispersed over a wide age-range (20–34 years, n = 13; 35–49 years, n = 11; 50–64 years, n = 12; 65–79 years, n = 12; 80+ years, n = 10) were used for this study. Participants’ height and weight were objectively assessed. The GESTALT protocol was approved by the Intramural Research Program of the US National Institute on Aging and the Institutional Review Board of the National Institute of Environmental Health Sciences. All participants provided written, informed consent at every visit.
Muscle Biopsies
Prior to skeletal muscle biopsies, the depth of the subcutaneous fat (uncompressed and compressed) was determined using MRI images of the middle thigh performed on the previous day. A region above the vastus lateralis muscle was marked at the mid-point of a line drawn between the great trochanter and the mid-patella upper margin. The skin was prepped with povidone – iodine (Betadine®) and ethyl alcohol, and the outside areas covered with sterile drapes. The biopsy site was anesthetized, first intradermally using a 27-gauge needle and then subcutaneously using a 23-gauge × 1 1/2 -inch needle, follow by an 18-gauge spinal needle, with ∼15 mL of 1% lidocaine in sodium bicarbonate. This method ensured that the subcutaneous tissue and muscle fascia, but not the muscle fibers, were infiltrated with the anesthetic so as not to distort the tissue structure. A 6-mm Bergstrom biopsy needle was inserted through the skin and fascia incision into the muscle, and muscle tissue samples were obtained by manual suctioning and cutting with a coaxial blade. The biopsy specimen then was cut into small sections, which were snap frozen in liquid nitrogen and subsequently stored at -80°C until used for analyses.
Physical Activity Assessment
Physical activity participation was determined using an interview-administered standardized questionnaire originally developed for the health, aging, and body composition study and modeled after the leisure-time physical activity questionnaire. Levels of moderate to vigorous physical activity was estimated from responses to questions concerning brisk walking (“walking at a fast pace where it may be difficult for you to speak normally, sometimes called power walking”), weight or circuit training activities and vigorous exercise activities (“like bicycling, swimming, running, aerobics, basketball, soccer, rowing, racquet sports, stair-stepping, elliptical or cross-country ski machine or exercycle”). Participation data for up to four vigorous activities was collected. For each type of activity, participants were asked whether they performed the activity in the past 2 weeks and, if so, the frequency performed, and average amount of time spent for each activity. Total participation time in moderate to vigorous physical activity per week was calculated by multiplying frequency by amount of time performed for each activity, summing all of the activities then dividing by two to derive minutes of moderate to vigorous physical activity per week. For analyses, the following categories were used: <30 min per week of high intensity physical activity was considered “not active” and coded as 0; high intensity physical activity ≥30 and <75 min was considered “moderately active” and coded as 1, high intensity physical activity ≥75 and <150 min was considered “active” and coded as 2, and high intensity physical activity ≥150 min was considered to “highly active” and coded as 3. The resulting ordinal variable from 0 to 3 was used in the analysis. Participation in casual walking was determined in a similar manner. One-way ANOVA, non-parametric, and chi-square tests (continuous and categorical variables) were used to test for sample differences between physical activity groups and age groups.
Sample Preparation for LC-MS Analysis
Muscle samples were snap frozen in liquid nitrogen immediately after collection and stored at -80°C. On average, 8 mg of muscle tissue was pulverized in liquid nitrogen and lysed [8 M urea, 2 M thiourea, 4% CHAPS, 1% Triton X-100, 50 mM Tris (Sigma), pH 8.5] and sonicated. Protein concentration was determined using a 2-D Quant Kit (GE Healthcare Life Sciences). Detergents and lipids were removed using a methanol/chloroform extraction protocol. Proteins were resuspended in urea buffer [8 M urea, 2 M thiourea, 150 mM NaCl (Sigma)], reduced (50 mM DTT), and alkylated (100 mM iodoacetamide), then diluted 12 times with 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate, and digested {18 h at 36°C using a trypsin/LysC mixture [Promega, 1:50 (w/w)]}. Peptides were desalted, speed vacuum dried, and stored at -80°C. Tandem mass tag (TMT) labeling was performed according to the manufacturer’s instructions (TMT6plex, Thermo Fisher, Cat# 90066). Donor IDs were blinded and randomized to prevent TMT bias. Each TMT set included one donor from each of the 5 age groups and one reference sample. Each sample was spiked with 200 fM of bacterial beta-galactosidase digest (SCIEX) prior to TMT labeling. Labeled peptides were combined and fractionated.
High-pH RPLC Fractionation and Concatenation Strategy
High-pH RPLC fractionation was performed as described previously. Skeletal muscle tissues samples were separated using an organic gradient (5–50% B, 100 min) into 99 fractions (1 min each) and merged into 33 master fractions (fraction 1, 34, 67 = master fraction 1, fraction 2, 35, 68 = master fraction 2, and so on). Combined fractions were speed vacuum dried, desalted, and stored at -80°C until final LC-MS/MS analysis.
Nano LC-MS/MS Analyses
Skeletal muscle samples were analyzed using an UltiMate 3000 Nano LC Systems coupled to a Q Exactive HF mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific, San Jose, CA, United States). Each fraction was separated by reverse phase on a 35-cm capillary column (3-μm C18, Hamilton, HxSil cat 79139) with 150 μm ID at 650 nL/min (5–30% B, 205 min). Tandem mass spectra were obtained using a Q Exactive HF mass spectrometer with a heated capillary temperature +280°C and spray voltage set to 2.5 kV. Full MS1 spectra were acquired from 300 to 1500 m/z at 120,000 resolution and 50-ms maximum accumulation time with automatic gain control set to 3 × 106. Dd-MS2 spectra were acquired using a dynamic m/z range with a fixed first mass of 100 m/z. MS/MS spectra were resolved to 30,000 with 155-ms of maximum accumulation time and the automatic gain control target set to 2 × 105. The 12 most abundant ions were selected for fragmentation using 30% normalized high collision energy. A dynamic exclusion time of 40 s was used to discriminate against the previously analyzed ions.
Proteomics Informatics
Raw data from each sample fraction were converted to mascot generic format (.mgf) using MSConvert (ProteoWizard 3.0.6002), producing a list of MS ions with retention times and MS/MS spectra. This list of ions was searched with Mascot 2.4.1 and X!Tandem CYCLONE (2010.12.01.1) using SwissProt Human sequences from the Uniprot database (Version Year 2015, 20,200 sequences, appended with 115 contaminants). The search engine uses each protein sequence from the database to produce every possible peptide from it according to the following search parameters: TMT6plex lysine and n-terminus as fixed modifications and variable modifications of carbamidomethyl cysteine, deamidation of asparagine and glutamate, and carbamylation of lysine, the N-terminus, and oxidized methionine. These modifications were frequently set as variable modifications because they are often generated by sample preparation. A peptide mass tolerance of 20 ppm and 0.08 Da were allowed, according to the known mass accuracy of the instrument, for precursor and fragment ions, as well as two missed cleavages. The TMT channels’ isotopic purity was corrected according to the TMT Kit instructions.
Results from the Mascot and X!Tandem search engines were analyzed by Scaffold Q+ 4.4.6 (Proteome Software, Inc), and the peptide and protein probabilities were calculated by PeptideProphet and the ProteinProphet probability model. The data were filtered at thresholds of 0.1% peptide false discovery rate (FDR), 1% protein FDR, and requiring a minimum of 1 unique peptide for protein identification. The experiments in this study compared proteins across multiple samples, identifying quantifiable peptides as only those detected across all samples (n = 58), reducing the probability of false peptide discovery. Finally, proteins were included for analysis even when identified from a single specific peptide, but only if the identification was confirmed by more than one search engine. As for single peptide quantification, the spectrum-to-spectrum variability was no higher between spectra from the same peptide than between spectra from different peptides from the same protein, reducing the likelihood of any differential “bias” in reporter ions from peptide to peptide. More importantly, TMT was taken as a relative, not absolute, quantification. Even if there were such a bias, it would be the same across samples and, thus, the relative quantification would not be affected. Spectral quantitative values were extracted from Scaffold and decoy spectra, while contaminant spectra and peptide spectra shared between more than one protein were removed. Typically, spectra are shared between proteins if the two proteins share most of their sequence, usually for protein isoforms. Spectra were retained for further analyses if they were exclusive to only one protein and were identified in all 6 channels across each TMT set. The log2 transformed spectral abundance was normalized by median subtraction from all reporter ion intensity spectra belonging to a protein across all channels. Relative protein abundance was estimated by the median of all peptides for a protein combined together. Protein sample loading effects from sample preparations were corrected by median polishing, i.e., subtracting the channel median from the relative abundance estimate across all channels to have a zero median.
Linear mixed regression models were used to examine the effect of physical activity (considered as an ordinal variable) on each protein after adjusting for age, race, BMI, the ratio between type I (MYH7) and type II myosin fibers (MYH1, MYH2, and MYH4) in order to account for different fiber type composition, and TMT mass spectrometry experiments. The ratio of type I and type II fiber was estimated from the log2 normalized protein intensities of MYH7, MYH1, MYH2, and MYH4. The expression of these fiber types was calculated for each participant and the ratio of the fiber types was estimated as the ratio of MYH7 over the sum of MYH1, MTH2, and MYH4 protein intensity. The size of the beta coefficient for physical activity (as an ordinal variable) was used to quantify the effect of physical activity on each protein independent of covariates, and the significance of the association from the regression model was determined with p-values derived from lmerTest. Any protein p < 0.05 was considered to be significant and reported in the main text as a protein associated with physical activity. Multiple testing correction of the p-values were performed using the Benjamini-Hochberg method in R and reported in the supplement. The regression model was performed using R 3.3.4 with the lme4 v1.1. library. Proteins with a negative beta coefficient were considered to be negatively associated with physical activity and the proteins with positive beta coefficient as positively associated with physical activity. Protein annotations were performed using GeneOntology, Uniprot keyword, and manual curation. Heat maps and hierarchical cluster analysis were performed using the non-linear minimization package in R. GraphPad PRISM 6.07 and R packages were used for statistical analysis and generation of figures. The mass spectrometry proteomics data have been deposited to the ProteomeXchange Consortium via the PRIDE partner repository with the dataset identifier PXD011967.