ABSTRACT:
Neuromelanin is a complex polymer pigment found primarily in the dopaminergic neurons of human substantia nigra. Neuromelanin pigment is stored in granules including a protein matrix and lipid droplets. Neuromelanin granules are yet only partially characterised regarding their structure and function. To clarify the exact function of neuromelanin granules in humans, their enrichment and in-depth characterization from human substantia nigra is necessary. Previously published global proteome studies of neuromelanin granules in human substantia nigra required high tissue amounts. Due to the limited availability of human brain tissue we established a new method based on laser microdissection combined with mass spectrometry for the isolation and analysis of neuromelanin granules. With this method it is possible for the first time to isolate a sufficient amount of neuromelanin granules for global proteomics analysis from ten 10 μm tissue sections. In total 1,000 proteins were identified associated with neuromelanin granules. More than 68% of those proteins were also identified in previously performed studies. Our results confirm and further extend previously described findings, supporting the connection of neuromelanin granules to iron homeostasis and lysosomes or endosomes. Hence, this method is suitable for the donor specific enrichment and proteomic analysis of neuromelanin granules.
METHODS:
Materials and Methods
Ethics statement
The use of human post mortem brain tissue was approved by the ethics committees of the Ruhr-University Bochum, Germany (file number 4760-13) and the University of Würzburg, Germany (file number 78/99) accordance with German guidelines and regulations. In case of tissue from the Netherlands Brain Bank, all material has been collected from donors for or from whom a written informed consent for a brain autopsy and the use of the material and clinical information for research purposes had been obtained by the Netherlands Brain Bank. Tissue from the Newcastle Brain Tissue Resource was obtained in accordance with the approval of the joint Ethics Committee of Newcastle, United Kingdom, and North Tyneside Health Authority, United Kingdom, with written informed consent and following Newcastle Brain Tissue Resource brain banking procedures.
Subjects
Cryopreserved postmortem SN sections from five human subjects with no history of neurological or neurodegenerative diseases and lacking neuropathological abnormalities were provided by the Brain Bank Center Würzburg, the Newcastle Brain Tissue Resource, UK and the Netherlands Brain Bank, Netherlands Institute for Neuroscience, Amsterdam. Neuropathological diagnoses were assigned using accepted international neuropathological criteria including neuritic Braak stages, Thal amyloid phases, CERAD scores, NIA-AA scores and McKeith criteria.
Cryosectioning for laser microdissection
The frozen midbrains were stored at −80 °C and sectioned at the level of the SN, which can be clearly identified by its dark color. With a Microm HM550 cryostat (Thermo Scientific, Dreieich, Germany) combined with a fixed knife holder (Leica Biosystems, Nußloch GmbH, Nußloch, Germany), slices were cut at −18 °C object temperature and −20 °C chamber temperature. The 5, 10 or 20 μm thick sections were placed on 1.0 PEN membrane glass slides that were optimized for LMD (Carl Zeiss Microscopy GmbH, Göttingen, Germany).
Sampling using laser microdissection
Using the bright field microscope of LMD (PALM Micro Beam, P.A.L.M.-System, Carl Zeiss Microscopy GmbH) NM granules can be observed within the SNpc without staining because of their black-brownish color. First, under bright field microscopy, the tissue slices were screened for NM granules at 400x magnification, and these granules were marked using software supplied by the manufacturer (PALMRobo 4.6 pro, Carl Zeiss Microscopy GmbH). Once all NM granules in a tissue section were marked, a non-adhesive microtube cap (MicroTube 500, Carl Zeiss Microscopy GmbH) filled with 50 μL of distilled water was applied to the instrument and placed over the tissue slice. First, NM granules were cut and catapulted with a laser into the sample cap. Afterwards, the tube was carefully closed and stored at −80 °C until further usage. Tissue depleted of NM granules was collected as control in a fresh tube as contamination control and treated like the NM granules samples (further referred to as “control”).
Proteomic analysis using mass spectrometry
Prior to tryptic digestion, the NM granules and control samples were adjusted with 2% (w/v) RapiGest™ SF Surfactant (Waters GmbH, Milford, MA, USA) to a final concentration of 0.1% RapiGest™. After incubation in an ultrasonic bath for 1 min, the samples were briefly centrifuged. The digestion protocol was performed as previously described. Briefly, 250 mM dithiothreitol was added and the samples were incubated for 30 min at 60 °C. Then, 0.55 M iodoacetamide was added and the samples were incubated for another 30 min in the dark. Trypsin was diluted in 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate and was added 1:25 (v/v) to the samples. Subsequently, digestion was performed for 4 h at 37 °C. The reaction was stopped via the addition of 10% trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) and incubation for 30 min at 37 °C. After 15 min centrifugation at 20,800 × g(av), the supernatant was transferred to a new sample vial and completely dried in a SpeedDry vacuum concentrator (RVC 2-25 CDplus, Martin Christ Gefriertrocknungsanlagen GmbH, Osterode, Germany). The peptides were stored in 20 μL of 0.1% TFA and maintained at −80 °C until the mass spectrometric measurements could be performed. The peptide concentrations were determined via amino acid analysis as previously described. Liquid chromatography tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS) analyses were performed with 200 ng of the sample per run using an UltiMate 3000 RSLC nano LC system (Dionex, Idstein, Germany) coupled to an Orbitrap Elite mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Bremen, Germany). Moreover, equal amounts of each sample were taken to prepare a mixture, which was measured in between the samples allowing analyzation of technical variances during measurements.
The peptides were first loaded on a capillary pre-column (Dionex, 100 μm × 2 cm, particle size 5 μm, pore size 100 Å) and washed for 7 min with 0.1% TFA. The pre-column was subsequently connected with an analytical C18 column (Dionex, 75 μm × 50 cm, particle size 2 μm, pore size 100 Å). Peptide separation was performed with 400 nL/min flow rate with a gradient that was initiated with 95% A (0.1% formic acid) and 5% B (84% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid) with increasing amounts of B (up to 40% within 95 min). The concentration of B was then increased to 95% within 2 min and maintained for 3 min. Afterwards, the column was again adjusted to 5% B. The LC system was directly coupled with a nano electrospray ionization source (Thermo Fisher Scientific) to the Orbitrap Elite mass spectrometer. The system operated with a scan range from 300 to 2,000 m/z with a resolution of 30,000 and 500 ms maximum acquisition time. From each full scan, the 20 most intensive ions were selected for low-energy collision induced dissociation (CID) with 35% collision energy and 50 ms maximal acquisition time. After fragment ion (MS/MS) scans, the mass to charge (m/z) values of the precursor masses were maintained for 35 s on a dynamic exclusion list. The mass spectrometry raw data have been deposited to the ProteomeXchange Consortium via the PRIDE partner repository with the dataset identifier PXD004987 and 10.6019/PXD004987.
Data analysis
Raw files derived from the measurements were analyzed using Proteome Discoverer 1.4 (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Bremen, Germany). For these analyses, a workflow template was designed using the Mascot search algorithm (Matrix Science, London, UK, version 2.2.0) for protein identification. The peptide mass tolerance was set to 5 ppm, and the fragment mass tolerance was 0.4 Da. The enzyme settings were set to “trypsin” and one possible missed cleavage site. Methionine oxidation was set as a variable modification and carbamidomethylation at cysteine was set as fixed modification. All data were searched against the UniProt/SwissProt decoy database (release 2015_05 of 29.04.2015; 548,454 entries without decoys) with a restriction to “Homo sapiens”. Resulting files were deposited along with the raw files to the ProteomeXchange Consortium via the PRIDE partner repository with the dataset identifier PXD004987 and 10.6019/PXD004987.
The spectral index calculations were subsequently performed as described. To reduce false-positive identifications the false discovery rate (FDR) was set on peptide spectrum match (PSM) level to <0.01, the PSM were exported from PIA (https://github.com/mpc-bioinformatics/pia) and further processed using the “pivot table” function in Microsoft Excel, which yielded a table of the spectral counts for every peptide that belonged to a certain protein in a sample. Here, only peptides assigned to be unique by PIA were used for protein identification and further relative quantification. Using this strategy, no decoy entries were left, hence protein level FDR was 0. The resulting protein table was then filtered, and only proteins identified in at least four of five NM granules or in three of four control samples with a t-test p-value <0.05 and a significant fold change were accepted for subsequent analysis. For this, technical variance was estimated by analyzing mixture measurements with spectral counting as described above. Proteins identified in at least two of six measurements were used to calculate technical variances by dividing the mean of the spectral indices through the standard deviation. The mean of the protein specific variation coefficients was 0.2644 and was multiplied with 4 to estimate which fold change would be accounted as differential by biological means and not differential due to technical variance. The resulting fold change cut off value was 1.058.
Subsequently, the list of proteins overrepresented in NM granules compared to the control (t-test<0.05; fold change <1.058) was analyzed using Ingenuity® pathway analysis (http://www.ingenuity.com, Qiagen, Redwood City, CA 94063, USA) to roughly determine their function and localization. Ingenuity® pathway analysis is a web-based software application for the analysis, integration, and interpretation of data. Proteins were uploaded to assign localization and function basing on a knowledge base implemented in the software.
Identified proteins were also compared with proteins identified from NM granules enriched by density gradients. Moreover, the proteins were further characterized regarding their function and localization via the analysis of Gene Ontology data deposited at www.uniprot.org and via functional annotation clustering using DAVID.
Additionally, resulting p-values were adjusted using R according to the method of Benjamini and Hochberg to control the false discovery rate of the t-test and identify highly significant differential proteins.
The resulting data are shown in Supplement Table 1.