ABSTRACT:
Papillary renal cell carcinoma (pRCC) is a malignant kidney cancer with a prevalence of 7–20% of all renal tumors. Proteome and metabolome profiles of 19 pRCC and patient-matched healthy kidney controls were used to elucidate the regulation of metabolic pathways and the underlying molecular mechanisms. Glutathione (GSH), a main reactive oxygen species (ROS) scavenger, was highly increased and can be regarded as a new hallmark in this malignancy. Isotope tracing of pRCC derived cell lines revealed an increased de novo synthesis rate of GSH, based on glutamine consumption. Furthermore, profound downregulation of gluconeogenesis and oxidative phosphorylation was observed at the protein level. In contrast, analysis of the The Cancer Genome Atlas (TCGA) papillary RCC cohort revealed no significant change in transcripts encoding oxidative phosphorylation compared to normal kidney tissue, highlighting the importance of proteomic profiling. The molecular characteristics of pRCC are increased GSH synthesis to cope with ROS stress, deficient anabolic glucose synthesis, and compromised oxidative phosphorylation, which could potentially be exploited in innovative anti-cancer strategies.
METHODS:
4. Experimental Procedures
4.1. Tissue Dissection and Verification of Papillary RCC 
Malignant and non-malignant tissues of 19 nephrectomies performed between 2008 and 2016 at the Department of Urology, Charité—Universitätsmedizin Berlin, were collected in liquid nitrogen immediately after surgery and preserved at −80 °C. The clinical characteristics of the tumors are reported in Table 1. From the collected tissue samples, histologic sections were stained with hematoxylin and eosin. The diagnosis of pRCC and the corresponding matched tumor-free kidney tissue was done according to World Health Organization (WHO) classification criteria. Only cases with a clear diagnosis of pRCC were considered for the study. The study was approved by the institutional Ethics Committee (no. EA1/134/12, Charité – Universitätsmedizin Berlin) and was carried out in accordance with the Declaration of Helsinki. All participants gave informed consent. The ethic commission (Ethikausschuss 1 am Campus Charité Mitte, Berlin, Germany) voted on 14.6.2012 to approve the study with the topic “Nachweis von Biomarkern im Gewebe und in Körperflüssigkeiten für die Diagnose und Prognose bei Patienten mit urologischen Tumoren” (freely translated: Detection of tissue and body fluid biomarkers for diagnosis and prognosis in patients with urological tumors).
4.2. Whole Exome Sequencing (WES)
DNA was isolated from remaining pellets from metabolite extraction using a DNA purification kit following the manufacturer’s protocol for tissues (QIAmp DNA Mini Kit, Qiagen, Hilden, Germany). In brief, samples were digested by proteinase K at 56 °C overnight and RNase A treated at 70 °C, before subjecting to exome sequencing.
The library preparation was performed according to Agilent’s SureSelect protocol (SureSelectXT Human All Exon V5, protocol version B4 August 2015), (Agilent, Santa Clara, CA, USA) for Illumina paired-end sequencing. In brief, 200 ng of genomic DNA (in 50 μL low Tris-EDTA(TE)) were sheared for 6 × 60 sec on a Covaris™ S2, (Thermo Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA) (duty factor 10%, intensity 5, 200 cycles per burst).
The fragmented DNA (150–200 bp) was purified using AMPure XP beads and subjected to an end-repair reaction. Following another purification step, the DNA was 3’adenylated and furthermore purified. Paired-end adaptors were ligated and the afterward purified library was amplified with 10 amplification cycles. The amplified library was purified, quantified and hybridized to the probe library for exome capture. Captured fragments were purified using streptavidin-coated beads and eluted with 30 μL nuclease-free water. Using Herculase-enzyme, the enriched libraries were amplified and indexed with barcoded primers followed by cleanup and quantification. The resulting libraries were pooled and subjected to Illumina NextSeq4000 (San Diego, CA, USA) paired-end sequencing (six libraries/FC; 2 x 150 bp).
Quantification of the SureSelect captured library: Before sequencing, the samples were re-quantified with two methods. First, the size and concentration was checked on the Agilent 2100 Bioanalyzer and in a second step the enrichment efficiency was estimated by qPCR (Applied Biosystems, Waltham, MA, USA) using a primer set for an enriched exon (forward: ATCCCGGTTG TTCTTCTGTG and reverse: TTCTGGCTCTGCTGTAGGAAG) and a primer set in an intron region as a negative control (forward: AGGTTTGCTGAGGAACCTTGA and reverse: ACCGAAACATCCTGGCTACAG). In general, the cycle threshold (Ct)-values of target and control fragments differed by 6 to 10, thus confirming a very good enrichment of our target regions.
After diluting the captured libraries to 10 nM, Genome Analyzer single-read flow cells were prepared on the supplied Illumina cluster station and 36 bp single-end reads on the Illumina Genome Analyzer IIx platform (Illumina, San Diego, CA, USA) were generated following the manufacturer’s protocol. Images from the instrument were processed using the manufacturer’s software to generate FASTQ sequence files.
4.3. Analysis of mtDNA Mutations
The FASTQ files were used as input for the MToolBox pipeline in order to extract mitochondrial DNA sequences and quantify each variant allele heteroplasmy and related confidence interval. The same pipeline allows haplogroup prediction of mtDNA sequences, detection of mismatches, insertions and deletions and the functional annotation of the identified variants. The in silico prioritization criteria were used to target the mitochondrial DNA variants of clinical interest. Thus, variants found in the mitochondrial reference sequences The revised Cambridge Reference Sequence (rCRS), the Reconstructed Sapiens Reference Sequence (RSRS) and the macro-haplogroup consensus sequence (MHCS), which occurred in non haplogroup-defining sites with a nucleotide variability lower than the nucleotide variability cutoff (0.0026) and a disease score above the disease score threshold of 0.43 for non-synonymous coding for proteins, 0.35 for tRNA, and 0.60, for rRNA variants were prioritized.
4.4. Sample Preparation for Proteomics
About 10 mg frozen tissue per sample was homogenized under denaturing conditions with a FastPrep instrument (three times for 60 s, 6.5 m × s−1) in a buffer containing 4% sodium dodecyl sulfate (SDS), 0.1 M dithiothreitol (DTT), 0.1 M Tris pH 7.8, followed by sonication for 5 min, boiled at 95 °C for 5 min and precipitated with acetone at −20 °C overnight. Lyophilized proteins were dissolved in 6 M guanidinium chloride, 10 mM tris(2-carboxyethyl)phosphine, 40 mM chloroacetamide, and 100 mM Tris pH 8.5. Samples were boiled for 5 min at 95 °C and sonicated for 15 min in a water sonicator. The lysates were diluted 1:10 with nine times volume of 10% acetonitrile and 25 mM Tris, 8.5 pH, followed by trypsin digestion (1:100) at 37 °C overnight. Subsequent, the peptides were purified with C18 columns. For whole proteome profiling, 90 µg of each sample was fractionated by strong cation exchange (SCX) chromatography. Five µg of each SCX fraction was used for proteome profiling.
4.5. LC-MS Instrument Settings for Shotgun Proteome Profiling and Data Analysis
Liquid chromatography–mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS) was carried out by nanoflow reverse phase liquid chromatography (Dionex Ultimate 3000, Thermo Scientific) coupled online to a Q-Exactive HF Orbitrap mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific). Briefly, the LC separation was performed using a PicoFrit analytical column (75 μm ID × 55 cm long, 15 µm Tip ID (New Objectives, Woburn, MA, USA) in-house packed with 3-µm C18 resin (Reprosil-AQ Pur, Dr. Maisch, Ammerbuch-Entringen, Germany). Peptides were eluted using a gradient from 3.8 to 40% solvent B (79.9% acetonitrile, 20% water, 0.1% formic acid) in solvent A (0.1 % formic acid in water) over 120 min at 266 nL per minute flow rate. Nanoelectrospray was generated by applying 3.5 kV. A cycle of one full Fourier transformation scan mass spectrum (300−1750 m/z, resolution of 60,000 at m/z 200, AGC target 1e6) was followed by 16 data-dependent MS/MS scans (resolution of 30,000, AGC target 5e5) with a normalized collision energy of 27 eV. In order to avoid repeated sequencing of the same peptides, a dynamic exclusion window of 30 sec was used. In addition, only peptide charge states between two to eight were sequenced.
Raw MS data were processed with MaxQuant software v1.6.0.1 (MPI of Biochemistry, Munich, Germany) and searched against the human proteome database UniProtKB with 70,941 entries, released in 01/2017. Parameters of MaxQuant database searching were: A false discovery rate (FDR) of 0.01 for proteins and peptides, a minimum peptide length of 7 amino acids, a mass tolerance of 4.5 ppm for precursor and 20 ppm for fragment ions were required. A maximum of two missed cleavages was allowed for the tryptic digest. Cysteine carbamidomethylation was set as fixed modification, while N-terminal acetylation and methionine oxidation were set as variable modifications. MaxQuant processed output files can be found in Table S1, showing peptide and protein identification, accession numbers, % sequence coverage of the protein, q-values, and label-free quantification (LFQ) intensities. Contaminants, as well as proteins identified by site modification and proteins derived from the reversed part of the decoy database, were strictly excluded from further analysis. The mass spectrometry proteomics data have been deposited to the ProteomeXchange Consortium via the Pride partner repository with the dataset identifier PXD013523.
4.6. Metabolite Extraction and Profiling by Targeted LC-MS
About 30 mg of 16 pRCC and healthy kidney tissues, shock-frozen in liquid nitrogen, was used for metabolite profiling. Metabolite extraction and tandem LC-MS measurements were done as we have previously reported. In brief, methyl-tert-butyl ester (MTBE), methanol, ammonium acetate, and water were used for metabolite extraction. Subsequent separation was performed on an LC instrument (1290 series UHPLC; Agilent, Santa Clara, CA, USA), online coupled to a triple quadrupole hybrid ion trap mass spectrometer QTrap 6500 (Sciex, Foster City, CA, USA), as reported previously. Transition settings for multiple reaction monitoring (MRM) are provided in Table S9. The mass spectrometry data have been deposited in the publically available repository PeptideAtlas and can be obtained via . 
The metabolite identification was based on three levels: (i) the correct retention time, (ii) up to three MRM’s and (iii) a matching MRM ion ratio of tuned pure metabolites as a reference. Relative quantification was performed using MultiQuant software v.2.1.1 (Sciex). The integration setting was a peak splitting factor of 0 and all peaks were reviewed manually. Only the average peak area of the first transition was used for calculations. Normalization was done according to used amounts of tissues and subsequently by internal standards, as indicated in Table S8. 
4.7. Cell Culture Conditions for Glutathione and Proline de novo Synthesis 
The two pRCC-derived cell lines Caki-2 (ATCC HTB-47, reclassified from ccRCC) and ACHN (ATCC CRL-1611) and the human kidney (HK-2, cortex/proximal tubule, ATCC CRL-2190) cell line were cultivated in Dulbecco’s modified Eagle medium (DMEM, Life Technologies, New York, NY, USA) containing 4.5 g/L glucose, supplemented with 10% fetal bovine serum (FBS, Silantes, Munich, Germany) and 1% penicillin–streptomycin–neomycin (Invitrogen, Carlsbad, CA, USA) at 37 °C in a humidified atmosphere of 5% CO2. 
To determine the source for GSH de novo synthesis and potential differences between the pRCC cell lines Caki-2 and ACHN versus HK-2 kidney controls, two isotope tracing experiments were performed. The first experiment employed 13C6 labeled glucose, the second 13C515N glutamic acid as probe, a scheme of GSH synthesis is outlined in Figure 7. In addition, proline de novo synthesis was monitored simultaneously within the experimental setting of glutamate as a tracer (Figure 6J).
GSH labeling dynamics were probed by sampling at time points 0, 12, and 24 h, for proline 0 and 12 h were taken in 6-well plate triplicates for all three cell lines. The cells were rinsed twice with PBS and replenished at time point 0 by either a glucose-free DMEM medium with the addition of 5 mM 13C6 glucose (Cambridge Isotope Laboratories Inc., Tewksbury, MA, USA), 10% dialyzed FBS and 1% penicillin/streptomycin, or by HBSS solution supplemented with 2 mM 13C515N-glutamic acid (Cambridge Isotope Laboratories), 5 mM glucose, 0.4 mM glycine, 10% dialyzed FBS and 1% penicillin/streptomycin. Before metabolite extraction, cells were washed twice by PBS, ice-cold methanol (−80 °C) was added and the cells were scraped from the plate and metabolites were extracted as described for tissues. The MRM method was extended to also include isotope-transitions for metabolites originating from labeled glucose and glutamate (Table S9). As GSSG can be made of either one or two labeled GSH molecules, both versions were measured (13C6 glucose: M+3 and M+6; 13C515N-glutamic acid: M+5 and M+10). 
4.8. Experimental Design, Statistical Rationale, and Pathway Analyses
Seven pRCC type I, seven pRCC type II, and five pRCC type II metastatic cancer samples were compared with adjacent matched normal kidney tissues. For quantitative proteome profiling, nanoscale liquid chromatography coupled to high-resolution mass spectrometry (nano-LC-MS/MS) was used to quantify the abundance of dysregulated proteins. For quantitative metabolome profiling, a UHPLC coupled to a QTrap instrument (Sciex) was used for the targeted approach (multiple reaction monitoring, MRM) to identify and quantify the abundance of dysregulated metabolites.
For proteome and metabolome data sets, a two-sample t-test was performed. Multiple test correction was done by Benjamini-Hochberg with an FDR of 0.05 by using Perseus v1.6.0.2. Significantly regulated proteins and metabolites were marked by a plus sign in the corresponding Tables S2 and S9. The Pearson correlation was based on “valid values” for each pRCC type in Perseus.
For comprehensive proteome data analyses, gene set enrichment analysis GSEA, v3.0 (Broad institute, San Diego, USA) was applied in order to see, if a priori defined sets of proteins show statistically significant, concordant differences between pRCC and kidney tissues. Only proteins with valid values in at least seven of ten samples in at least one group with replacing missing values from the normal distribution for the other group were used (Table S2). GSEA default settings were applied, except that the minimum size exclusion was set to 5 and KEGG v5.2 was used as a gene set database. The cut-off for significantly regulated pathways was set to a p-value ≤ 0.01 and FDR ≤ 0.10.
For protein-protein interaction (PPI) network analyses, the software tool String v.10.5 (CPR, EMBL, SIB, KU, and UZH) has been used to visualize networks of significantly up- or down-regulated proteins with a confidence level of 0.7. High blood contamination was identified in the following five samples: pRCC type I kidney 7 and case 5; pRCC type II case 7; pRCC type IIM kidney 3 and case 2; which were then excluded from further proteome and metabolome analysis. These exclusions were based on the individual GSEA pathway and the String PPI network results, where the pathways “coagulation cascade” or “blood particles” were significantly enriched. 