ABSTRACT:
Cyclic nucleotide signalling is a major regulator of malaria parasite differentiation. Phosphodiesterase (PDE) enzymes are known to control cyclic GMP (cGMP) levels in the parasite, but the mechanisms by which cyclic AMP (cAMP) is regulated remain enigmatic. Here, we demonstrate that Plasmodium falciparum phosphodiesterase β (PDEβ) hydrolyses both cAMP and cGMP and is essential for blood stage viability. Conditional gene disruption causes a profound reduction in invasion of erythrocytes and rapid death of those merozoites that invade. We show that this dual phenotype results from elevated cAMP levels and hyperactivation of the cAMP-dependent protein kinase (PKA). Phosphoproteomic analysis of PDEβ-null parasites reveals a >2-fold increase in phosphorylation at over 200 phosphosites, more than half of which conform to a PKA substrate consensus sequence. We conclude that PDEβ plays a critical role in governing correct temporal activation of PKA required for erythrocyte invasion, whilst suppressing untimely PKA activation during early intra-erythrocytic development.
Phosphodiesterase β (PDEβ) is essential for blood stage development of the malaria parasite. In its absence, phosphorylation of over 200 proteins is adversely affected, revealing PDEβ to be a central regulator that could be targeted with new antimalarial drugs.
Author summary
Cyclic nucleotide signalling pathways are ubiquitous in eukaryotes and regulate a plethora of cellular processes. Pathway components include cyclases and phosphodiesterases that synthesise and break down the intracellular second messengers cyclic AMP (cAMP) and cyclic GMP (cGMP); the signal is translated into a cellular response by effector kinases activated by elevated cyclic nucleotide levels. Malaria parasites deploy cyclic nucleotide signalling to regulate virtually every stage of their complex life cycle. Using a conditional gene knockout approach, we investigate the function of phosphodiesterase β (PDEβ) in the disease-causing blood stage parasites. PDEβ disruption causes a severe reduction in erythrocyte invasion and rapid post-invasion death. Although we show that PDEβ can hydrolyse cAMP and cGMP, both parts of the phenotype are linked to elevated cAMP levels and hyperactivation of PKA. Quantitative phosphoproteomic analysis identified sites that are differentially phosphorylated in the PDEβ knockout, revealing a role for cAMP signalling in cellular processes ranging from chromatin organisation to protein synthesis, as well as the regulation of parasite-specific components of the erythrocyte invasion machinery. In summary, PDEβ disruption causes a profound dysregulation of key events during blood stage replication that could be exploited for the development of new antimalarial drugs.
METHODS:
Materials and methods
Small molecules and antibodies
WR99210 was a kind gift from Jacobus Pharmaceuticals (New Jersey), RAP and the cysteine protease inhibitor E64 were purchased from Sigma, the PKG inhibitor Compound 2 was synthesised by MRC Technology (London, United Kingdom), the PKA inhibitor H89 was obtained from TOCRIS Biosciences, the PDE inhibitor BIPPO was a kind gift from Philip E. Thompson (Monash University, Australia). Calcium chelators BAPTA-AM and Fluo-4 AM were purchased from Thermo Fisher Scientific, and the calcium ionophore A23187 was from Sigma-Aldrich.
Rat monoclonal anti-HA tag antibody (clone 3F10) and the same antibody conjugated to agarose beads were purchased from Roche LifeScience. Rabbit anti-AMA1 antibody raised against the ectodomain was described previously. Rabbit anti-EBA175 is described in. Rabbit anti-GAP45 and rat anti-MyoA antisera were kind gifts from Judith Green (The Francis Crick Institute, London, UK). Monoclonal mouse antibodies to MSP1-19 (2F10) and MSP1-83 (89.1) have been described previously. A mouse monoclonal antibody to Plasmepsin V was a kind gift from Daniel E. Goldberg (Washington University School of Medicine in St. Louis, USA). A mouse monoclonal antibody against PfGAPDH was a kind gift from Claudia Daubenberger (SwissTPH, Basel, Switzerland), rabbit anti-SERA5 is described in, rabbit anti-PKG antibody was from ENZO life sciences (New York), rabbit anti pS19-MyoA phospho-antibody was raised against the phosphopeptide ‘N’-RRV[pS]NVEAFDKC conjugated to KLH and double purified on the phosphopeptide, followed by passing through its nonphosphorylated counterpart. A rabbit monoclonal antibody specifically reacting with phosphorylated PKA substrate consensus motif (R,K/R,X,pS/pT) was purchased from Cell Signaling Technology.
All fluorescently labelled secondary antibodies used were highly cross-adsorbed and either conjugated to Alexa 488 (green) or Alexa 594 (red) (Molecular Probes).
Construction of the PfPDEβ-HA tagging and PfPDEβ conditional knockout plasmid
A construct based on the pHH1_SERA5del3DC vector was generated to C-terminally tag the endogenous Pfpdeβ locus with a 3×HA tag. The construct contained a 0.9-kb 3′ fragment of the PfPDEβ gene, to facilitate single crossover recombination, fused to the HA tag. A loxP site was placed downstream and the 3′UTR of P. berghei DT. The construct also contained a second loxP site and a hDHFR gene, which confers resistance to the antifolate WR99210. The resulting plasmid pPfPDEβ-HA was originally generated with the intention of conditionally ablating PfPDEβ function by excision of the 3′UTR flanked by loxP sites.
To create the PfPDEβ conditional knockout plasmid, a synthetic, partially recodonised (Spodoptera frugiperda codon usage) PfPDEβ sequence was synthesised by GenScript. The sequence comprised 1 kb of native P. falciparum PfPDEβ targeting sequence containing native PDEβ sequence to drive recombination by single crossover, a loxP site inserted into intron 6 (of 8), and the remaining 819 bp of the PfPDEβ exonic sequence were recodonised to prevent recombination downstream of the loxP site. A triple HA tag was added to the 3′ end of the sequence, followed by a stop codon. The synthetic PDEβ gene containing the internal loxP site and the recodonised sequence was cloned into pPfPDEβ-HA, replacing the 0.9-kb fragment to yield pPfPDEβΔcatHA.
P. falciparum culture and synchronisation
P. falciparum erythrocytic stages were cultured in human A+ erythrocytes (National Blood Transfusion Service, London, United Kingdom) and RPMI 1640 medium (Lifetech) supplemented with 0.5% AlbuMAX type II (Gibco), 50 uM hypoxanthine, and 2 mM L-glutamine according to standard procedures. Tightly synchronised parasites were obtained by purification of segmented schizonts on a 70% Percoll (GE Healthcare) cushion, addition of fresh erythrocytes to allow invasion for 1 to 3 hours shaking, followed by another Percoll purification to remove unruptured schizonts and sorbitol lysis of the pellet to obtain highly pure and synchronous ring stages.
Transfection of P. falciparum blood stages
Genetic manipulation of P. falciparum parasites was carried out as previously described. A total of 80 μg of precipitated plasmid DNA was resuspended in 400 μL cytomix (120 mM KCl, 0.15 mM CaCl2, 2 mM EGTA, 5 mM MgCl2, 10 mM K2HPO4/KH2PO4, and 25 mM HEPES [pH 7]). The DNA-cytomix solution was added to 250 μL of the packed ring stage cultures at 5% to 10% parasitaemia and the sample electroporated at 950 μF capacitance and a voltage of 0.31 kV using a GenePulser Xcell (Bio-Rad). Twenty-four hours later, the selection drug WR99210 was added at 5 nM concentration. Once parasites were visible, the cultures were cycled off the drug for 3 weeks, then on the drug until parasites reached 1% parasitaemia for one to four cycles.
Limiting dilution to generate clonal parasite lines
Ring stage cultures were counted using a haemocytometer and diluted to give 0.25 parasites per well in a 96-well plate at 2% haematocrit. Culture media was replaced every 3 days. After 14–21 days, positive wells were identified using a lactate dehydrogenase assay.
Integration and excision PCRs
Integration of the HA-tagging plasmid pPfPDEβ-HA into the Pfpdeβ (PF3D7_1321500) locus was verified using primers Int F 5′ GTTGAAAAGCAGTACAATAATGTTCCTTATC 3′ and Int R 5′ CGGGATCATAAACCTCGATTG 3′, and the following primers were used to detect the WT locus and the absence of integration: WT R 5′ GCCAAGTCGAATGGAAAGATATTG 3′ and WT F 5′ GTTGAAAAGCAGTACAATAATGTTCCTTATC 3′. Integration of the PDEβ loxP plasmid pPfPDEβΔcatHA into the same locus to create PfPDEβΔcatHA was confirmed by PCR using primers specific for the integrated locus: int-F 5′ GTTCTTCAAATGGTTGTGTAAAATTAT 3′ and int-R 5′ GGCCAATGTCGTGGCAGATG 3′. Cre recombinase–mediated excision of the PDEβ catalytic domain (exons 7 to 9) was monitored using primers specific for the excised locus: exc-F 5′ GTAATAAGAATGAATAGGCATATATGT 3′ and exc-R 5′ TGAACATTGAAATTTGTATCCGTCT 3′. The 3′ end of the PDEβ coding region unaffected by plasmid integration or Cre recombinase–mediated excision served as DNA quality and loading control: 3′end-F 5′ CAACTAAACCAATGTAATATTTT 3′ and 3′end-R 5′ CGGGATCATAAACCTCGATTG 3′. Primers int-F and 3′end-R were combined to specifically amplify the wild-type locus.
SYBR Green growth assays
Synchronous ring stage cultures were adjusted to 0.5% parasitaemia, set up in 96-well flat-bottom plates at 1% haematocrit, and triplicate samples frozen down daily for the duration of the assay. Eventually, cells were lysed in 20 mM Tris, 5 mM EDTA, 0.008% saponin, 0.08% Triton X-100, 1× SYBR Green I (Molecular Probes), pH 7.5, and read in a fluorescent plate reader at 485-nm excitation and 535-nm emission. Relative fluorescence units were normalised based on the day 0 sample and plotted. To determine EC50 concentrations for inhibitors used in this study, the same assay was conducted with 2-fold serial dilutions of the test compounds in triplicate wells and termination of the assay after 72 hours.
Immunofluorescence microscopy
Dried blood films were fixed in 4% formaldehyde and permeabilised with 0.1% Triton X-100 in PBS. Blocking and antibody reactions were carried out in 3% bovine serum albumin in PBS and washed with PBS. Slides were air-dried and mounted with ProLong Gold Antifade Mountant containing DAPI (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Images were acquired on a NIKON Eclipse Ti fluorescence microscope fitted with a Hamamatsu C11440 digital camera and overlaid in ICY bioimage analysis software (icy.bioimageanalysis.org). Pure merozoites were obtained by dual MACS (Miltenyi Biotec) purification. Rupturing schizont cultures were isolated on the magnet, put back into culture for 45 minutes, then run through the MACS column again, and the flowthrough containing merozoites was centrifuged at 3,500g for 5 minutes. Merozoite preparations were smeared on glass slides, air-dried, and fixed with cold methanol. Blocking and antibody reactions were carried out as described above.
Time-lapse video microscopy
Segmented schizonts were purified from RAP- or mock-treated PfPDEβΔcatHA cultures as described above, introduced into custom-made viewing chambers, and imaged on a Nikon Eclipse Ni-E widefield microscope with a Hamamatsu C11440 camera and a Nikon N Plan Apo λ 100x/1.45NA oil immersion objective. For egress videos, images were taken at 5-second intervals over a total of 30 minutes. Individual egress events were cropped, trimmed, and converted to video file format in ICY bioimage analysis software. For invasion videos, images were taken every 150 ms for 8 minutes following schizont rupture and processed using the Nikon NIS elements AR software. Merozoites from each rupture event were followed up and scored for their ability to deform the host cell, induce echinocytosis, and complete invasion.
Microscopy of Giemsa-stained blood films
Thin blood films were air-dried, methanol fixed, and stained with Giemsa’s azure-eosin-methylene blue (Merck) and imaged on an Olympus BX51 microscope fitted with an Olympus SC30 digital colour camera through a 100× oil immersion objective.
Quantification of PDEβ KO post-invasion death dynamics
RAP-mediated excision was performed on PfPDEβΔcatHA as described above, but treating 3/4 of the whole culture and leaving 1/4 for the control to adjust for the reduced invasion expected in the PDEβ KO. Segmented schizonts from RAP- and DMSO-treated cultures were purified and fresh erythrocytes added to allow invasion for 4 hours and obtain a ring stage parasitaemia of 8% to 10% for both conditions. Giemsa-stained thin blood films taken at five different time points spanning the whole intra-erythrocytic cycle were assessed blind by two different researchers and parasites assigned to either of three morphological categories: normal morphology, delayed, or pyknotic/condensed. More than 300 parasites were scored per time point and condition.
Inhibitor treatments of early ring stages
Wild-type parasites (3D7) were synchronised to a 2-hour invasion window as described above to obtain a pure culture with 7% to 10% ring stage parasitaemia. Kinase inhibitor treatments were started at 2–4 hours post-invasion, 1 hour before addition of the PDE inhibitor BIPPO. The PKA inhibitor H89 was used at 16.3 μM (approximately 1×EC50), the PKG inhibitor Compound 2 at 1.5 μM (approximately 3×EC50), and the PDE inhibitor BIPPO at 1.2 μM (approximately 3×EC50). Giemsa-stained thin blood films taken at 19–21 hours post-invasion were scored for their viability. More than 100 parasites per condition and experiment were counted blind by three researchers each.
FACS analysis to measure DNA content, egress, and invasion
Parasite cultures were set up in triplicate wells per condition and fixed with 4% formaldehyde/0.1% glutaraldehyde in PBS containing 1× SYBR Green I (Molecular Probes) for 30 minutes at room temperature. Fixative was washed out with PBS and SYBR Green fluorescence read on a BD LSR II Flow Cytometer (Becton Dickinson). Data were analysed using FlowJo 7 analysis software (Becton Dickinson). For schizont DNA content analysis, the distribution of SYBR Green fluorescence was displayed as a histogram. To analyse schizont rupture and ring stage formation over time, schizontaemia and ring stage parasitaemia were calculated using high or low SYBR Green fluorescence, respectively.
Parasite protein extraction, SDS PAGE, and immunoblotting
Parasites were released from host erythrocytes by saponin lysis and PBS-washed pellets resuspended in 2–3-pellet volumes of NP-40 lysis buffer (10 mM Tris, 150 mM NaCl, 0.5 mM EDTA, 0.5% NP-40, pH 7.5, + cOmplete protease inhibitors [Roche]), incubated on ice for 10 minutes, and supernatants collected after centrifugation at 15,000g for 15 minutes at 4 °C. Reducing SDS sample buffer was added and proteins separated on 4%–15% Mini-PROTEAN TGX Stain-Free Protein Gels (Bio-Rad). Proteins were transferred to nitrocellulose membranes in a Trans-Blot Turbo Transfer System (Bio-Rad) and blocked with 10% skimmed milk in PBS/0.1% Tween-20. Antibody reactions were carried out in 1% skimmed milk in PBS/0.1% Tween-20 and washed in PBS/0.1% Tween-20. Washed membranes were incubated with Clarity Western ECL substrate (Bio-Rad) and exposed to X-ray film.
Egress assays
Schizonts were Percoll purified from synchronised PfPDEβΔcatHA cultures containing mainly segmented schizonts and some young ring stages. Purified schizonts were resuspended in RPMI, 100 uL aliquots distributed in 96-well plates, and assay started immediately. At different time points, culture supernatants were separated from parasite material by centrifugation followed by purification through 0.22-μm Costar Spin-X centrifuge filters (Corning). Presence of SERA5 in culture supernatants was quantified by western blot and used as a measure of schizont rupture. Western blots were probed with anti-AMA1 and anti-EBA175 antibodies to detect differences in adhesin shedding dynamics.
Calcium release assays
Changes in the levels of intracellular free Ca2+ in response to PDE inhibitors were measured in purified late schizonts. Schizonts were resuspended in warm Ringer buffer (122.5 mM NaCl, 5.4 mM KCl, 0.8 mM MgCl2, 11 mM HEPES, 10 mM D-Glucose, 1 mM NaH2PO4, pH 7.4) to 1–2 × 108 parasites/mL (25 μL packed cell volume per 1 mL Ringer buffer). A total of 2 μL of 5 mM Fluo-4 AM (Thermo Fisher) was added per 1 mL of parasite preparation. Cells were incubated in the dark with Fluo-4 AM at 37 °C for 45 minutes. Cells were then washed twice in warm Ringer buffer and incubated for 20 minutes to allow for de-esterification of the AM ester. This was followed by a further two washes. The pellet was resuspended in Ringer buffer at 1–2 × 108 parasites/mL and plated out on a 96-well plate.
Baseline Fluo-4 fluorescence in each well was read at 488-nm excitation and 525 emission using a SPECTRAmax M3 microplate fluorimeter (Molecular Devices) preheated to 37 degrees Celcius at 20-second intervals for a period of 3 minutes. The plate was removed from the reader onto a heat block prewarmed to 37 °C, and cell suspensions were transferred to wells containing test compounds to give the desired final concentrations (ionophore A23187 [20 μM], BIPPO [2 μM], zaprinast [100 μM], and Compound 2 [2 μM]). The plate was placed back in the plate reader and read for a further 5 minutes at 20-second intervals. Relative fluorescence units from individual reads were averaged and averaged baseline reads subtracted. Results are presented as percentage of ionophore control.
Parasite lysate preparation for enzyme assays
Packed P. falciparum schizonts were obtained by saponin lysis and resuspended in ice-cold 5 mM Tris-HCl (with EDTA-free protease inhibitors), centrifuged repeatedly at 16,000g for 10 minutes at 4 °C, and the supernatant aspirated to remove residual RBC material until the supernatant was clear. The pellet was then resuspended in 250 μL PDE lysis buffer (10 mM Tris-HCl, pH 7.5, 150 mM NaCl, 0.5% Nonidet P-40, and EDTA-free protease inhibitors) per 50 μL of sample, incubated on ice for 30 minutes and centrifuged at 16,000g for 20 minutes at 4 °C. Supernatants were added to PDE assay.
Immunoprecipitation of PDEβ-HA
Pull-downs of the transgenic HA epitope–tagged PDEβ-HA were performed using the anti-HA Affinity Matrix (Roche, 11815016001) that incorporates immobilised rat monoclonal antibody (clone 3F10). Packed parasite pellets were obtained by saponin lysis. The pellet was resuspended in 250 μL ice-cold PDE lysis buffer per 50 μL of sample, incubated on ice for 30 minutes with occasional mixing, and centrifuged as described above. The supernatant was adjusted to 500 μL with PDE dilution buffer (10 mM Tris-HCl, pH 7.5, 150 mM NaCl, and EDTA-free protease inhibitors) to give a final detergent concentration of less than 0.2%, and the pellet discarded. A total of 20 μL of the matrix was washed twice with dilution buffer (centrifuged at 30 seconds 13,000g to pellet the matrix) to equilibrate the anti-HA affinity matrix. The lysate sample was then added to the equilibrated anti-HA affinity matrix, and incubated at RT for 2 hours with constant mixing. After incubation, the matrix was pelleted at 13,000g and the supernatant removed. The beads were washed twice with ice-cold dilution buffer and were added to the PDE assay.
PDE assays
PDE activity in P. falciparum particulate fractions and pull-down assays was measured by a scintillation proximity assay (SPA) using yttrium silicate–based SPA beads (Perkin Elmer, RPNQ0150). Scintillant is incorporated into beads, which bind to the primary phosphate groups of noncyclic 5′AMP or GMP, and the assay relies on the fact that cAMP and cGMP are unable to bind. Assays were carried out in flexible 96-well plates (Perkin Elmer, 1450–401) in a 100-μL volume. A total of 90 μL of protein sample diluted in PDE assay buffer (50 mM Tris-HCl, 8.3 mM MgCl2, and 1.7 mM EGTA) was added to each well, and 10 μL of a cNMP dilution (5 μL of [3H] cNMP tracer [Perkin Elmer cAMP-NET275250UC, cGMP-NET337250UC] in 995 μL PDE assay buffer) was added to start the reaction. Plates were incubated at 37 °C for 1 hour. Reactions were terminated by addition of 50 μL of resuspended PDE SPA beads (reconstituted to 20 mg/mL in distilled H2O). Plates were sealed with Plateseal (Perkin Elmer) briefly shaken and then incubated for 20 minutes at RT to allow the beads to settle. Scintillation was measured using a Wallac 1450 Microbeta Counter (Perkin Elmer) for 30 seconds. An initial dose-response assay was performed with doubling dilutions of the sample to ensure the substrate was not depleted during the course of the assay. The initial sample was diluted to give roughly 30% hydrolysis of the cyclic nucleotide.
Measurement of intracellular cyclic nucleotide levels
Relative intracellular cAMP and cGMP in mature schizonts were measured using ELISA-based FluoProbes high-sensitivity chemiluminescent assay kits (Interchim). Mature schizonts were Percoll purified from RAP- or DMSO-treated PfPDEβΔcatHA cultures followed by saponin lysis and two PBS washes. Parasite pellets were directly lysed in sample diluent for 10 minutes at room temperature, centrifuged at 20,000g for 15 minutes, and the supernatant collected and diluted 1:5 in sample diluent. Samples and cyclic nucleotide standards were acetylated according to the manufacturer’s high sensitivity protocol. Standards and samples were run in triplicates on the same plate and luminescence read with a Spectramax M3 plate reader. The standard was fitted to a sigmoidal curve and used to determine cyclic nucleotide concentrations in parasite samples.
Global phosphoproteomics and proteomics
The PfPDEβΔcatHA line was synchronised to a 2-hour invasion window, as described above, to obtain 5×108 ring stages. The culture was split into two, and one half was treated with 100 nM RAP and the other with vehicle (DMSO). RAP and DMSO were washed out 3 hours later. Schizonts were Percoll purified 40 hours post-invasion and grown for a further 8 hours in the presence of 1.5 μM PKG inhibitor Compound 2. Fully segmented schizonts were then harvested and host erythrocytes lysed with 0.15% saponin (Sigma) in the presence of complete protease inhibitors (Roche) and washed twice in PBS plus protease inhibitors, snap-frozen and stored at −80 °C. Parasite proteins were extracted with 10 volumes of 9 M urea in 50 mM HEPES, pH 8.5, containing benzonase (Sigma) at 100 units/mL. Lysates were sonicated with a probe sonicator (three bursts of 15 seconds on ice), centrifuged at 15,000g for 30 minutes at 4 °C, and protein content determined by a Bradford protein assay. A total of 1.05 mg of each protein sample was reduced by 5 mM dithiothreitol, alkylated with 10 mM iodoacetamide, and quenched with 7.5 mM dithiothreitol. Samples were diluted with 50 mM HEPES to reduce the urea concentration to <2 M prior to trypsin digestion. Peptides were desalted using a C18 Sep-Pak cartridge under vacuum, each sample divided into three (3 × 350 μg), and dried. Samples were resuspended in 50 mM HEPES and 30% (v/v) acetonitrile, and the corresponding TMTsixplex (0.8 mg) label (resuspended in anhydrous acetonitrile) was added (TMT6-126, -127, -128 to +RAP; TMT6-129, -130, -131 to DMSO). Hydroxylamine was added to quench the reaction, and the samples were mixed and desalted using a C18 Sep-Pak cartridge. Dried peptide mixtures were resuspended in 1 M glycolic acid + 80% acetonitrile + 5% trifluoroacetic acid and added to titanium dioxide beads (5:1 [w/w] beads:protein), washed under acidic pH, and eluted from the beads by adding 1% ammonium hydroxide followed by 5% ammonium hydroxide, and dried by vacuum centrifugation. One third of the material was desalted with the use of a C18 Stage Tip, and the other two thirds was fractionated and desalted by the use of a Pierce High pH Reversed-Phase Peptide Fractionation Kit.
An Orbitrap Fusion Lumos was used for data acquisition. Desalted phosphopeptide mixtures were resuspended in 25 μL 0.1% trifluoroacetic acid and injected twice (10 μL per injection); high-pH fractionated phosphopeptide mixtures were resuspended in 15 μL 0.1% trifluoroacetic acid and injected once (10 μL). Each run consisted of a 3-hour gradient elution (75 μm × 50 cm C18 column), with higher-energy collision dissociation (HCD) being the selected activation method. MaxQuant (version 1.5.2.8) was used for all data processing. The data were searched against UniProt extracted H. sapiens and P. falciparum proteome FASTA files. A decoy database containing reverse sequences was used to estimate false discovery rates and the false discovery rate was set at 1%. Default MaxQuant parameters were used with the following adjustments: reporter ion MS2 with the sixplex TMT isobaric labels was selected, Phospho(STY) was added as a variable modification, and ‘Filter labeled amino acids’ was deselected. Protein levels (MaxQuant ProteinGroups) were calculated from nonphosphorylated material quantified in the phosphopeptide-enriched sample. The mass spectrometry proteomics data have been deposited to the ProteomeXchange Consortium via the PRIDE partner repository with the dataset identifier PXD009157. CDPK1 and CRK4 substrate motifs used as controls were combinations of motifs proposed previously. Individual motifs are shown in S5 Fig.
Data analysis
All graphs were created using GraphPad Prism7 and statistical significance tests performed in the same software.
Statistical significance tests on phosphoproteome data (Welch t test with S0 = 0.2, permutation-based FDR set to 0.05 and 250 randomisations), motif analyses, 1D rank-based annotation enrichment, scatterplots, and all matrices were created in Perseus 1.4.0.2.
Sequence logo was created using IceLogo (https://iomics.ugent.be/icelogoserver/) using all 5,374 phosphosites (31 amino acid sequence windows) identified in this study as the reference dataset and all phosphosites significantly (Welch t test) increased in the PfPDEβ KO sample as the experimental set.
GO enrichment analysis was performed on Gene Ontologizer (http://ontologizer.de/) using the latest ontology and P. falciparum gene association files downloaded from http://www.geneontology.org. Parent-Child-Union was used as the calculation method and p-values adjusted using the Bonferroni correction. All gene IDs present in the phosphoproteome dataset served as reference against gene IDs representing significantly changed phosphosites in the PfPDEβ KO sample.