ABSTRACT:
Purpose
Despite extensive biological and clinical studies, including comprehensive genomic and transcriptomic profiling efforts, pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma (PDAC) remains a devastating disease, with a poor survival and limited therapeutic options. The goal of this study was to assess co-expressed PDAC proteins and their associations with biological pathways and clinical parameters.
Methods
Correlation network analysis is emerging as a powerful approach to infer tumor biology from omics data and to prioritize candidate genes as biomarkers or drug targets. In this study, we applied a weighted gene co-expression network analysis (WGCNA) to the proteome of 20 surgically resected PDAC specimens (PXD015744) and confirmed its clinical value in 82 independent primary cases.
Results
Using WGCNA, we obtained twelve co-expressed clusters with a distinct biology. Notably, we found that one module enriched for metabolic processes and epithelial-mesenchymal-transition (EMT) was significantly associated with overall survival (p = 0.01) and disease-free survival (p = 0.03). The prognostic value of three proteins (SPTBN1, KHSRP and PYGL) belonging to this module was confirmed using immunohistochemistry in a cohort of 82 independent resected patients. Risk score evaluation of the prognostic signature confirmed its association with overall survival in multivariate analyses. Finally, immunofluorescence analysis confirmed co-expression of SPTBN1 and KHSRP in Hs766t PDAC cells.
Conclusions
Our WGCNA analysis revealed a PDAC module enriched for metabolic and EMT-associated processes. In addition, we found that three of the proteins involved were associated with PDAC survival.
Electronic supplementary material
The online version of this article (10.1007/s13402-020-00548-y) contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.
METHODS:
Material and methods
Patient samples
Approval from the Local Medical Ethical committee at the VU University Medical Center was received (#14038). All patients provided informed consent for tissue sampling, clinical data analysis, and molecular analysis. Snap-frozen tumor samples from 39 patients included between January 2014 until November 2015 were evaluated by the Department of Pathology (Amsterdam UMC, Amsterdam). After pathological revision, 20 samples were eligible for further analysis. A minimum of 5–10% tumor surface was needed for further processing in this study. Clinical parameters were collected prospectively, OS and DFS data were obtained from electronic patient records. One patient was censored for OS analysis, since this patient succumbed to complications after surgery, defined as mortality within 60 days after surgery.
Protein isolation from bulk tumor tissue and sample preparation for mass spectrometry
Protein isolation was performed as previously described. Briefly, protein lysates were separated on pre-cast 4%–12% gradient gels using the NuPAGE SDS-PAGE system (Invitrogen, Carlsbad, CA, USA). Gels were fixed in 50% ethanol/3% phosphoric acid solution, stained with Coomassie brilliant blue G-250 and then washed and dehydrated in 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate (ABC) once and 50 mM ABC/50% acetonitrile (ACN) twice. Gel lanes were cut into five bands, with each band sliced further into approximately 1 mm3 cubes. The gel cubes were washed and dehydrated once in 50 mM ABC and twice in 50 mM ABC/50% ACN. Subsequently, the gel cubes were reduced in 10 mM DTT/50 mM ABC at 56 °C for 1 h, after which the supernatants were removed and the gel cubes were alkylated in 50 mM iodoacetamide/50 mM ABC for 45 min at room temperature in the dark. Next, the gel cubes were washed with 50 mM ABC/50% ACN, dried in a vacuum centrifuge at 50 °C for 10 min and covered with trypsin solution (Promega, 6.25 ng/ml in 50 mM ABC). Following rehydration with trypsin solution and removal of excess trypsin, the gel cubes were covered with 50 mM ABC and incubated overnight at 25 °C. Peptides were extracted from the gel cubes with 1% formic acid (FA) (once) and 5% FA/50% ACN (twice). All extracts were pooled and stored at −20 °C until use. Prior to liquid chromatography-mass spectrometry (LC-MS), the extracts were concentrated in a vacuum centrifuge at 60 °C, after which volumes were adjusted to 50 μl with 0.05% FA and filtered through a 0.45 μm spin filter into LC autosampler vials.
NanoLC-MS/MS proteomic analysis and database searching
NanoLC-MS/MS analysis was performed as previously described. In brief, peptides were separated using an Ultimate 3000 nanoLC system (Dionex LC-Packings, Amsterdam, The Netherlands) equipped with a 40 cm × 75 μm internal diameter (ID) fused silica column custom packed with 1.9 μm 120 Å ReproSil Pur C18 aqua (Dr Maisch GMBH, Ammerbuch-Entringen, Germany). The samples were injected by gel band, starting with gel band 1 at the top of the gel for all samples, followed by gel band 2, until the final gel band 5. The experiment was considered as one continuous injection series with a blank injection at the start of the experiment. After injection, peptides were trapped at 6 μl/min on a 1 cm × 100 μm ID trap column packed with 5 μm 120 Å ReproSil C18 aqua at 2% buffer B (buffer A: 0.05% formic acid in MQ; buffer B: 80% acetonitrile +0.05% formic acid in MQ) and separated at 300 nl/min in a 10–40% buffer B gradient for 75 min (100 min inject-to-inject). Eluting peptides were ionized at a potential of +2 kVa into a Q Exactive mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher, Bremen, Germany). Intact masses were measured at resolution 70.000 (at m/z 200) in the Orbitrap using an AGC target value of 3E6 charges. The top 10 peptide signals (charge-states 2+ and higher) were submitted to MS/MS in the HCD (higher-energy collision) cell (1.6 amu isolation width, 25% normalized collision energy). MS/MS spectra were acquired at resolution 17.500 (at m/z 200) in the orbitrap using an AGC target value of 1E6 charges, a maxIT of 60 ms and an underfill ratio of 0.1%. Dynamic exclusion was applied with a repeat count of 1 and an exclusion time of 30 s. MS/MS spectra were searched against a Swissprot reference proteome FASTA file (release January 2018, 42,258 entries, canonical and isoforms, no fragments), using MaxQuant version 1.6.0.16. Enzyme specificity was set to trypsin and up to two missed cleavages were allowed. Cysteine carboxamidomethylation (Cys, +57.021464 Da) was treated as fixed modification and methionine oxidation (Met, +15.994915 Da) and N-terminal acetylation (N-terminal, +42.010565 Da) as variable modifications. Peptide precursor ions were searched with a maximum mass deviation of 4.5 ppm and fragment ions with a maximum mass deviation of 20 ppm. Peptide and protein identifications were filtered at a false discovery rate (FDR) of 1% using the decoy database strategy. Proteins that could not be differentiated based on MS/MS spectra alone were grouped to protein groups (default MaxQuant settings). A protein was considered identified when at least 1 unique peptide was identified in one sample at high confidence (peptide and protein FDR < 1%). Searches were performed with the label-free quantification option selected. Proteins detected were quantified based on MaxQuant (version 1.6.0.16) output data. Label-free quantification (LFQ) intensities were filtered by contaminants and only proteins with observations across all samples were retained. The MS proteomics data have been deposited to the ProteomeXchange Consortium via PRIDE with accession number PXD015744.
Weighted gene correlation network analysis (WGCNA) and functional enrichment of identified modules
A protein co-expression network is an undirected graph, where each node corresponds to a protein, and each edge connects a pair of proteins that are significantly correlated. The key concept in WGCNA is “connectivity”. Connectivity describes direct and indirect relationships between two proteins/genes in networks.This metric has e.g. previously been used in breast cancer for drug prioritization by Neidlin et al..
To investigate co-expressed proteins in resected patient PDAC samples, we used the WGCNA package in R version 3.5.0 WGCNA defines modules as a group of densely interconnected proteins. In unweighted networks the only information given is the correlation “yes” or “no”, while for weighted networks, users can also gain information about the strength of a correlation. To remove random noise and enhance the strength of correlation, a particular threshold is required from the user. In the WGCNA package and so in this study, the choice was made by applying the scale-free topology criterion using a soft threshold also known as “beta power”. Different soft thresholds were tested (from 1 to 20) and power = 10 was retained to be enough to get an adjacency matrix very similar to a scale-free topology (correlation = 0.90) as shown in Supplementary Fig. S1. More explicitly, the adjacency matrix is obtained by using the correlation value between two proteins raised to the power threshold β (Formula 1)
where a(ij) is the weighted value of a protein in the adjacency matrix defined by rising the co-expression similarity s(ij) to a power β. Finally, modules are obtained by setting a cut-tree cut off on hierarchical clustering branches. In this study, a dynamic cut-tree method was chosen. Briefly, the algorithm starts by obtaining few large clusters by the static tree cut and, next, implements an iterative process of cluster decomposition and combination. The iteration stops only when the number of clusters becomes stable. The dynamic tree method is essential to avoid relatively small modules. In this study, the minimum module size was set to 20 and the cut height was set to 0.998 automatically by the WGCNA tool. Each module was summarized by a vector of values (1 × 20 in this analysis, where 20 is the number of samples) that was called Module Eigenprotein (ME) and corresponded to the first principal component of the given module. The final network was defined using the weighted option and threshold = 0.02 based on the value range of the data.
The GSEA of the modules was performed by mapping the proteins to gene names and submitting the gene list of each module to the GSEA Broad Institute browser. Gene sets were ranked by significant p value and number of overrepresented genes. We adopted GSEA to perform functional enrichment analysis for each subnetwork based on GO biological process (BP) terms, cellular components (CC), hallmarks of cancer (HC) and transcription factor binding sites (TFBS). Each gene set was ranked using the FDR score and the number of overlapping genes between the module and the gene set. Moreover, the top 5 over-represented terms of each module were subjected to STRING analysis, in order to find the best descriptive biology for each specific module.
Survival analysis and meta-analysis
Clinical data of patients undergoing resection were obtained from electronic patient records and referral hospitals. Survival data were obtained from government registration. The ME for each module was then correlated to DFS and OS. Assuming to have a trait T and a Module Eigenprotein (ME), correlation or univariate regression models can be used to measure the extent of their association. Modules with a high trait significance may underlie biological pathways associated with the sample trait. Meta-analysis was carried out by applying univariate Cox regression, multivariate Cox regression and log-rank tests on our proteomics dataset and on two different transcriptomics datasets (TCGA and Moffitt et al.). Prognostic marker candidates were ranked based on the number of significant p values obtained from the above-mentioned statistical tests. Kaplan-Meier curves were plotted using “survminer” package in R.
Immunohistochemical validation of prognostic markers in an independent cohort
Immunohistochemistry (IHC) of tissue microarrays (TMAs) was evaluated as previously described. In brief, FFPE tissues from resected patients were selected and combined in TMAs, including four representative cores from 4 different tumor areas for each patient. IHC staining of KHSRP, SPTBN1 and PYGL was performed according to the manufacturer’s protocols. Anti-KHSRP monoclonal antibody (1:200, anti-KHSRP rabbit ab150393 Abcam), anti-SPTBN1 monoclonal antibody (1:500, anti-SPTBN1 mouse MA3–062, Invitrogen) and anti-PYGL polyclonal antibody (1:150, anti-PYGL rabbit ab198268) were used. Visualization was obtained using a BenchMark Special Stain Automation system (Ventana Medical Systems, Export, USA). Protein staining was evaluated by a molecular pathologist, assessing the amount of tumor and tissue loss, background and overall interpretability. Cytoplasmic immunostaining intensity was classified into four grades: 0 (absent), 1 (weak), 2 (moderate) and 3 (strong), for both STPBN1 and PYGL. To reduce the scoring complexity, samples were defined as “with high expression”, when the staining score was >2 in at least 50% of the tumor cells. The nuclear immunostaining intensity of KHSRP was classified into two grades: 0 (absent) and 1 (present). All patients provided written informed consent for the storage and analysis of their tumor material and survival data, respectively. This study was approved by the Local Ethics Committee of the University of Pisa (Ethics approval #3909, July 3rd, 2013).
Univariate and multivariate analyses were performed using a Cox regression model. Proteins with HR (Hazard Ratio) < 1 were considered protective and those with HR > 1 were defined as non-protective. Meanwhile, proteins with p values < 0.05 were considered statistically significant. A risk score method was used to assess the association of the three prognostic markers with OS in a multivariate analysis. The risk score was evaluated by combining the TMA scores of prognostic proteins weighted by their regression coefficients from univariate Cox regression (Formula 2).
where n is the number of prognostic proteins, TMAscore is the score of TMA for protein i, and βi the regression coefficient of protein i in the univariate Cox regression analysis.
Group comparisons were evaluated using the unpaired nonparametric Mann-Whitney U test or unpaired Student’s t test. Fishers exact test was used for categorical analysis. Correlations with clinicopathological characteristics, including DFS and OS, were tested using Kaplan-Meier curves and the log-rank test, as described above.
Cell culture
Hs766t cells (ATCC, Manassas, USA) were grown in DMEM (Lonza, Verviers, Belgium) supplemented with 10% heat-inactivated fetal bovine serum and 1% penicillin-streptomycin (10,000 U/ml, Gibco, Gaithersburg, MD, USA). Cells were kept at 37 °C in an atmosphere of 5% CO2 in 75 cm2 tissue culture flasks (Greiner Bio-One GmbH, Frickenhausen, Germany) and, for all the experimental procedures, harvested using trypsin-EDTA (Sigma, Zwijndrecht, The Netherlands) in their exponentially growing phase. Cells were tested within the last 3 months by microscopic morphology check and growth curve analysis according to the Cell Line Verification Test Recommendations (ATCC-Technical Bulletin No. 8, 2008). Periodic assays were carried out to detect mycoplasma contamination, and the identity of the cells was confirmed by PCR profiling using short tandem repeats (STR).
Immunofluorescence assay
Immunofluorescence analysis was performed according to a previously established protocol. Briefly, cells were seeded in a Chamber-Slides System (Lab-Tek, Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, USA) at a density of 5000 cells/well and allowed to attach overnight. Next, co-expression of KHSRP and SPTBN1 was evaluated in Hs766t PDAC cells, stained simultaneously with an anti-KHSRP monoclonal antibody (1:400, anti-KHSRP rabbit ab150393 Abcam) followed by an Alexa Flour 535 anti-rabbit antibody (Red; 1:70), and an anti-SPTBN1 monoclonal antibody (1:100, anti-SPTBN1 mouse MA3–062, Invitrogen) followed by an Alexa Flour 488 anti-mouse antibody (Green; 1:70). Nuclear DNA was stained with 4′, 6-diamidino-2-phenylindole (DAPI). Images were captured using a Zeiss Laser Scanning Microscope, processed and merged using Axiovision 4.1 software (Zeiss Microimaging, Thornwood, USA). In vitro experiments were performed with a minimum of three biological replicates, evaluating at least 100 cells.