ABSTRACT:
Malignant melanoma has the highest increase of incidence of malignancies in the western world. In early stages, front line therapy is surgical excision of the primary tumor. Metastatic disease has very limited possibilities for cure. Recently, several protein kinase inhibitors and immune modifiers have shown promising clinical results but drug resistance in metastasized melanoma remains a major problem. The need for routine clinical biomarkers to follow disease progression and treatment efficacy is high. The aim of the present study was to build a protein sequence database in metastatic melanoma, searching for novel, relevant biomarkers. Ten lymph node metastases (South-Swedish Malignant Melanoma Biobank) were subjected to global protein expression analysis using two proteomics approaches (with/without orthogonal fractionation). Fractionation produced higher numbers of protein identifications (4284). Combining both methods, 5326 unique proteins were identified (2641 proteins overlapping). Deep mining proteomics may contribute to the discovery of novel biomarkers for metastatic melanoma, for example dividing the samples into two metastatic melanoma “genomic subtypes”, (“pigmentation” and “high immune”) revealed several proteins showing differential levels of expression. In conclusion, the present study provides an initial version of a metastatic melanoma protein sequence database producing a total of more than 5000 unique protein identifications. The raw data have been deposited to the ProteomeXchange with identifiers PXD001724 and PXD001725.
METHODS:
Materials and Methods
Clinical Samples
This study was approved by the Regional Ethical Review Board, Southern Sweden; approval number: DNR 191/2007 and 101/2013. All patients within the study provided a written informed consent. The tumor tissues used were lymph nodes metastases from 10 MM patients undergoing surgery at Lund University Hospital, Sweden. The fresh specimens were divided into two parts. One portion of the metastasis was fixed in formalin, paraffin embedded and sectioned for histopathological confirmation and the other part was snap frozen within minutes after removal and stored at -80°C in the Biobank. The frozen specimens were used as described below for both protein expression analysis and histological comparisons.
Histology of Tumors
Frozen tissue samples were sectioned on a cryostat into 6 μm thick sections, placed upon glass slides, dried at 37°C for 30 min and fixed with 100% methanol for 5 min. The sections were stained with HE, where protein-rich cytoplasm stains dark pink while cytoplasm that is actively synthesizing protein stains rich purple and the nucleus stains blue.
Sample Preparation
Frozen tissue samples from each tumor were sliced into 10 x 10 μm thick sections using a cryotome. The sections were lysed in 200 μl of 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate and 6 M urea and sonicated with a Branson Sonifier 250 (output 4, 10% duty cycle) for 2 minutes followed by centrifugation at 10 000 g for 5 minutes. The amount of protein in the samples was determined by the BCA method (Pierce, Rockford, IL). A fixed amount (150 μg) of protein were reduced with 10 mM DTT (1 h at 37°C) and alkylated using 40 mM iodoacetamide (30 min, kept dark at room temperature) followed by buffer exchange with 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate buffer (pH 7.6). The samples were then digested with sequencing grade trypsin (Promega, Madison, WI) in a ratio 1:120 w/w (trypsin:protein) overnight at 37°C. The digestion was stopped by adding 30 μL 1% formic acid. The samples were dried using a centrifugal evaporator and resuspended in 150 μL 1% formic acid and centrifuged for 5 min at 10 000 g. The supernatants were stored at -80°C until further use.
Sample Fractionation
Strong cation exchange chromatography was performed using Microspin columns (MA SEM HIL-SCX, 10–100μg capacity, The Nest group Inc., South Borough) according to the manufacturer’s instruction. The amount of peptides loaded to the columns corresponded to 50μg protein. The peptides were eluted by stepwise salt gradient using 0, 20, 40, 60, 100 and 500 mM KCl in 10 mM potassium phosphate, 20% acetonitrile, pH 2.8. The eluted fractions were dried using a centrifugal evaporator and resuspended in 0.1% TFA in water. Before LC-MS/MS analysis the fractions were desalted using Ultra Microspin column Silica C18 (SUM SS18V, 3–30 μg capacity, The Nest group Inc., South Borough) according to the manufacturer’s instruction. After elution with 50% ACN, 0.1% TFA in water, the fractions were dried using a centrifugal evaporator and each fraction was resuspended in 15 μL 1% formic acid.
LC-MS/MS Analysis of the Tumor Lysate Digest
The samples were first loaded onto a trapping column (150 mm x 20 μm, Thermo Scientific, San José, CA, USA). The samples were then separated using a column (50 cm x 75 μm, C18, 2 μm and 100Å, PN 164540, Thermo Scientific, San José, CA, USA) with a flow rate of 250 nL/min. A nonlinear gradient was used, using solvent A (0.1% formic acid) and solvent B (0.1% formic acid in ACN). The gradient started with 5% B and 20% B at 120 min, followed by 40% B at 180 min, increased to 90% at 185 min, which was maintained for 5 min.
Both unfractionated and fractionated tumor lysate digests were analyzed using a Q-Exactive, using top10 data-dependent approach. Full MS scans were acquired in the Orbitrap mass analyzer over m/z 350–1800 range with resolution 70,000 (at m/z200). The target value was 3.00E+06. The ten most intense peaks with charge state≥2 were fragmented in the HCD collision cell with normalized collision energy of 30%, and tandem mass spectra were acquired in the Orbitrap mass analyzer with resolution 17,500 at m/z 200. The target value was 1.00E+05. The ion selection threshold was 3.30E+05 counts, and the maximum allowed ion accumulation times were 100 ms for full MS scans and 150 ms for tandem mass spectra. For all the experiments, dynamic exclusion was set to 90 s. The total protein amount of un-fractionated tumor lysate digest injected to the MS/MS platform was 1.25 μg and for the fractionated samples the protein amount was estimated to be 1 μg (50 μg of peptides were fractionated into 6 fractions, approximately 8.3 μg in each fraction). The fractions were dried and resuspended in 15 μL 1% formic acid which gave a concentration of 0.6 μg/μL and 2 μL was injected to the LC-MS/MS).
Data analysis
Raw data were analyzed with Proteome Discoverer v 1.3 (Thermo Scientific, San José, CA, USA) using both Sequest and Mascot search engines. Uniprot Human (release 06/03/2013) database was used. Precursor and fragment mass tolerances were set to 1 Da, where the maximum of missed cleavage sites was three and 1% false discovery rate was used. At least two unique peptides were necessary for protein identification, and at the parameter Peptide Confidence in the Proteome Discoverer was required to be at least “medium”. The mass spectrometry proteomics data have been deposited to the ProteomeXchange Consortium via the PRIDE partner repository with the dataset identifiers PXD001724 and PDX001725.
Bioinformatics
Protein lists were analyzed using the DAVID tool set. Enrichment of the lists in particular functional annotations was assessed in DAVID by Fisher's exact test with Benjamini-Hochberg correction for multiple tests. Generally, annotations were considered significant if the Fisher's exact test p-value after Benjamini-Hochberg correction was below 0.001. In this application of the Fisher's exact test, sample sizes were relatively large, specifically; the protein lists analyzed here numbered hundreds of proteins. In a single case, the protein list analyzed by the Fisher's test was small. This was an inherent result of comparison of occurrence frequencies between the melanoma subsets. Gene Ontology annotations, SwissProt keywords, and KEGG pathways were used as annotation terms for the DAVID enrichment analysis. For lists of proteins with significantly changed expression, the background protein sets consisted of all proteins detected by applying the given proteomics approach (fractionated or unfractionated). For the list of all proteins detected, the background protein set consisted of all human proteins. Proportional area Venn diagrams were created using the BioVenn program. Other visualizations, list manipulations and charts were conducted in Spotfire (Somerville, MA, USA, www.tibco.com).
For statistical analysis of significant differences in protein occurrences between the “pigmentation” and “high immune” patient sample sets, Mann-Whitney U test was used as implemented in the in XLSTAT program. For the purpose of this test, for each protein, each sample was assigned an integer value between 0 and 3, corresponding to the number of times the protein was detected in replicates of the sample. Thus, for the unfractionated approach, for each protein the Mann-Whitney test compared two populations of five elements each. Differences in protein occurrences between the patient sample sets were considered significant if the Mann-Whitney U test p-value was below 0.05. In this application of the Mann-Whitney U test, sample sizes were relatively small, namely five patients in each group, as available in this pilot study. For the fractionated approach, sample numbers were too low to attempt a statistical evaluation of differences. This conservative approach to comparison of detection rates was selected to look for strong trends in differences in detection rates between the two sample sets. The ANOVA analysis was performed using the STATISTICA package (StatSoft) with default parameters, and the Least Significant Difference test. Differences in protein properties between sets of proteins detected using the different approaches (see Results) were considered significant if the ANOVA test p-value was below 0.001. In this application of the ANOVA test, sample sizes were relatively large; the groups that were compared numbered hundreds of proteins.