ABSTRACT:
Environmental exposure to mercury is suggested to contribute to human immune dysfunction. To shed light on the mechanism we identified changes in the phosphoproteomic profile of the WEHI-231 B cell line after intoxication with Hg2+. These changes were compared to changes in the phosphoproteome that were induced by pervanadate or okadaic acid exposure. Both 250 μM HgCl2 and pervanadate, a known phosphotyrosine phosphatase inhibitor, caused an increase in the number of proteins identified after TiO2 affinity selection and LC-MS/MS analysis. Pervanadate treatment had a larger effect than Hg2+ on the number of Scansite motifs which were tyrosine-phosphorylated, 17, and Ingenuity canonical signaling pathways activated, 4 with score > 5.0. However, Hg2+ had a more focused effect, primarily causing tyrosine-phosphorylation in SH2 domains in proteins that are in the B cell receptor signaling pathway. The finding that many of the changes induced by Hg2+ overlap with those of pervanadate, indicates that at high concentrations Hg2+ inhibits protein tyrosine phosphatases.
METHODS:
Material and Methods
Materials
Acetic Acid was from BDH Chemicals (through VWR, Radnor, PA), CaCl2 was from Orion, TFA (trifluoroacetic acid) was from Fisher Scientific (Pittsburgh, PA) and formic acid was from EMD. (Billerica, MA). TPCK (L-1-tosylamido-2-phenylethyl chloromethyl ketone)-treated bovine pancreas trypsin and all other reagents including solvents used for HPLC were the highest grade available from Sigma-Aldrich. (St Louis, MO). TiO2, 5 micron, was from GL Sciences.
Cell Culture
WEHI-231 cells were obtained from the American Type Culture Collection. Cells were maintained on RPMI 1640 supplemented with 10% fetal bovine serum, 2 mm glutamine, 50 μM mercaptoethanol, 100 U/ml penicillin and 100 μg/ml streptomycin in a humidified 5% CO2 atmosphere. Cells were passaged three times a week and harvested for experiments while in logarithmic growth.
Exposure and Harvesting
Cells were pelleted then resuspended at 5 × 106 cells per ml for exposure to HgCl2 (Hg2+) at 100 μM or 250 μM, pervanadate at 25 μM or okadaic acid at 100 nM. Following a 10 minute exposure in RPMI 1640 to the test agent the cells were washed twice in ice cold Hanks’ solution then pelleted and frozen. The treatments were divided into two separate experiments: the first experiment included 250 μM Hg2+, 100 nM okadaic acid and an untreated control, the second experiment included 100 μM Hg2+, 25 μM pervanadate and an untreated control. The first experiment was carried out using 3 independent samples per treatment and the second experiment with 4 independent samples per treatment.
Sample Preparation
Cell pellets were lysed in Tris, 20 mM pH 8.0, SDS, 0.5%, LiFl, 1.0 mM and Na3VO4, 0.1 mM then supernatant from a 20,000 × g centrifugation was taken for analysis. Protein in lysates was determined using a BCA assay (bicinchoninic acid assay; Pierce, Rockford, IL). Samples were digested overnight with 1:100 trypsin at a sample protein concentration of 1.0 mg/ml in buffer containing Tris, 20 mM, SDS, 0.1%, LiF, 1.0 mM, Na3VO4, 0.1 mM and 10% acetonitrile. All samples were evaluated by SDS-PAGE to ensure full digestion of the samples before proceeding to phosphopeptide isolation. Phosphopeptides were isolated from 1 mg of digested cell protein using 2 sequential incubations each with 2 mg of 5 μ TiO2 beads for the first experiment.
Phosphopeptide enrichment for the first and second affinity selections was 89 and 93 %, respectively, indicating that additional phosphopeptides could be harvested by increasing the ratio of TiO2 beads to protein without compromising the selectivity. Therefore, the second experiment used a single incubation with 6 mg of 5 μ TiO2 beads for each sample. The selectivity of the 6 mg of 5 μ TiO2 procedure was 98%. Cell digests were incubated with TiO2 in 2% TFA saturated with glutamic acid in 60% acetonitrile. The beads were washed three times with 1% TFA in 60% acetonitrile before eluting phosphopeptides with NH4OH in 50% acetonitrile. TiO2 eluates were neutralized with formic acid, dried under vacuum and stored at −80°C until analysis. Eluted peptides solubilized in 0.1% formic acid were then analyzed by LC-MS/MS without further purification.
Mass Spectrometry
All analyses were performed on a Thermo LTQ equipped with ETD (ThermoFisher Scientific, Watham, MA). Samples were loaded on a peptide Captrap (Michrom, Auburn, CA) trapping column and peptide separations achieved using a linear gradient of 5% to 35% acetonitrile to elute from a Majic 0.1 mm × 150 mm AQ C18 column (Michrom). The first experiment had data from two TiO2 selection steps that were run separately on the mass spec. The .raw files were combined during database searching and a total of 233,195 spectra from 9 samples were submitted for that experiment. The second experiment, with 100 μM Hg2+ or pervanadate, has only one TiO2 elution. Those 12 samples yielded a total of 239,443 spectra. LC-MS/MS for the second treatment group was run in a neutral loss mode so that high abundance precursor neutral losses of 24.25, 32.66, or 49.00 m/z found in an MS2 spectrum were selected for MS3 analysis. The first experiment LC-MS/MS did not incorporate a neutral loss scan.
Database Searching
Tandem mass spectra were extracted by Proteome Discoverer (ThermoFisher Scientific) version 1.4.0.288. Charge state deconvolution and deisotoping were not performed. All MS/MS data were analyzed using Mascot (Matrix Science, London, UK; version 2.4.0) and X! Tandem (The GPM, thegpm.org; version CYCLONE (2010.12.01.1)). Mascot and X!Tandem were each set up to search the 2013_04 release of the SwissProt database (selected for Mus musculus, 16611 entries) assuming the digestion enzyme trypsin. Spectra were searched with a fragment ion mass tolerance of 0.70 Da and a parent ion tolerance of 3.5 Da. The iodoacetamide derivative of cysteine was specified as a fixed modification. Oxidation of methionine, acetylation of the n-terminus and phosphorylation of serine, threonine and tyrosine were specified as variable modifications.
Criteria for Protein Identification
Scaffold (version 4.0.5, Proteome Software Inc., Portland, OR) was used to validate MS/MS based peptide and protein identifications. Peptide identifications were accepted if they could be established at greater than 95.0% probability by the Peptide Prophet algorithm. Protein identifications were accepted if they contained at least one identified phosphopeptide and had a Protein Prophet probability greater than 80%. Proteins that contained similar peptides and could not be differentiated based on MS/MS analysis alone were grouped to satisfy the principles of parsimony. All subsequent analysis of protein sets included all proteins or peptides that met the criteria for identification without weighting for the level of confidence in the identification.
Ascore Filtering
The Ascore algorithm was applied to phosphopeptides that met identification criteria and had multiple possible phosphorylation sites in order to determine which site or sites were likely to be modified and the confidence in those localizations. Site localization was accepted if the Ascore algorithm indicated at least 95% confidence in the assignment. Peptide identification data were imported into Scaffold PTM (Version 2.1.1, Proteome Software) software where the Ascore algorithm was implemented.
Motif Analysis
Ascore-filtered phosphorylation sites were searched against a database of putative protein kinase target motifs and phosphorylation-dependent binding motifs predicted by Scansite . Scansite uses data from oriented peptide library and phage-display experiments to generate position-specific scoring matrices that are queried against sequence databases to predict kinase target and domain binding sites. Our data were searched against the high stringency Scansite data that only include sites that fell within the top 0.2% of scores for each motif. All identified proteins were submitted to the Scansite web service (http://scansite3.mit.edu). Motifs identified in those proteins were retrieved and the invariant residue (the modified residue) for each was searched against our Ascore-filtered phosphorylation sites
Pathway Enrichment Analysis
Sets of proteins that were modified by the treatments were examined for overrepresented pathways using the IPA (Ingenuity Systems Inc., Redwood City, CA) Global Canonical Pathway Analysis (Content version: 14855783 (Release Date: 2013-02-05)). Pathways in the ingenuity canonical pathway database were tested for significant associations with the protein sets described in the results section using Fisher’s exact test with all mouse genes in the ingenuity knowledgebase as background.
Statistical Analysis
Statistical tests were carried out in R version 3.0.0 except for the ANOVA tests of protein normalized spectral counts which were carried out in DanteR version 0.2 . The sets of modified proteins were maximized for subsequent analysis by accepting statistical test results without correction for multiple testing unless otherwise stated. Proportional Venn diagrams were made with the EulerAPE tool available at http://www.eulerdiagrams.org/eulerAPE/. Where a value and range are reported, those values represent the mean and standard deviation.