ABSTRACT:
Mitochondrial dysfunction is a key feature in both aging and neurodegenerative diseases including Alzheimer’s disease (AD), but the molecular signature that distinguishes pathological changes in the AD from healthy aging in the brain mitochondria remain poorly understood. In order to unveil AD specific mitochondrial dysfunctions, this study adopted a discovery-driven approach with isobaric tag for relative and absolute quantitation (iTRAQ) and label-free quantitative proteomics, and profiled the mitochondrial proteomes in human brain tissues of healthy and AD individuals. LC-MS/MS-based iTRAQ quantitative proteomics approach revealed differentially altered mitochondriomes that distinguished the AD’s pathophysiology-induced from aging-associated changes. Our results showed that dysregulated mitochondrial complexes including electron transport chain (ETC) and ATP-synthase are the potential driver for pathology of the AD. The iTRAQ results were cross-validated with independent label-free quantitative proteomics experiments to confirm that the subunit of electron transport chain complex I, particularly NDUFA4 and NDUFA9 were altered in AD patients, suggesting destabilization of the junction between membrane and matrix arms of mitochondrial complex I impacted the mitochondrial functions in the AD. iTRAQ quantitative proteomics of brain mitochondriomes revealed disparity in healthy aging and age-dependent AD.
Electronic supplementary material
The online version of this article (10.1186/s13041-019-0430-y) contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.
METHODS:
Methods
Brain tissue samples and preparation
Frozen brain samples of the medial frontal gyrus from AD patients and age-matched controls were obtained from Netherlands Brain Bank, Meibergdreef 47, 1105 BA Amsterdam, The Netherlands. The scientific use of the human material was conducted in accordance with the Declaration of Helsinki, and informed consent was obtained from all patients or the guardians of the patients prior to donation of brain tissues upon their death. All procedures were approved and performed in accordance with the ethical guidelines of the Nanyang Technological University ethics board. The medial frontal gyrus of the human brain plays a major role in memory retrieval and the ability to remember previously experienced items/events. The medial frontal gyrus is involved during executive and volitional functions receive and integrate input from multiple systems, and play major role in executive mechanisms operative.
Frozen individual brain samples were thawed on ice and equal quantity was pooled in a group-wise manner. The individual clinical details of the patients are listed in Table 1. The brain tissue samples from each patient and control (in equal quantity) were pooled together within the group. We pooled two brain tissues in early onset AD and their age-matched control while old onset AD and control include five-tissue specimen. The tissue samples were homogenized in a urea-acetate buffer (8M urea, 100 mM ammonium acetate, pH 6.0) to prevent asparagine deamidation. The cell debris was removed by centrifugation at 5000 x g for 7 min at 4°C. The proteins were purified by acetone precipitation and 200 μg proteins from each group were loaded into 12.5% SDS-PAGE and run at 80V for 45 min. Each sample lane was excised separately, cut into small pieces (approximately 1 mm2 pieces) and washed with 75% acetonitrile (ACN) containing triethylammonium bicarbonate (TEAB, 25 mM). The gel pieces were reduced with Tris 2- carboxyethyl phosphine hydrochloride (5 mM) and then alkylated with methyl methanethiosulfonate (10 mM). Gel pieces were dehydrated using ACN and subjected to protein digestion with sequencing grade modified trypsin (Promega, Madison, WI) at 37°C. The peptides were extracted using 50% acetonitrile, 5% acetic acid and concentrated using vacuum concentrators (Eppendorf AG, Hamburg, Germany).
iTRAQ labeling and LC-MS/MS analysis
The iTRAQ labeling of dried peptides from both the control and disease groups was performed using a 4-plex iTRAQ reagent Multiplex kit (Applied Biosystems, Foster City, CA) as described earlier. The iTRAQ labeling was as follow 114: the Non-demented women brain of 67 ± 3.0-year-old (control); 115: the AD women brain of 68 ± 2.0-year-old, 116: Non-demented women brain of 84 ± 3.2 year old, and 117: AD women brain of 83.8 ± 3.5 year old. The label used for each group is listed in Table 1. iTRAQ experiment was performed in triplicate. Following labeling, the reaction was quenched; labeled peptides were mixed together and dried. Then iTRAQ-labeled peptides were desalted using Sep-Pak C18 cartridges, vacuum dried and fractionated on a C18 column (4.6 × 200 mm, 5 μm, 300 Å) (PolyLC, Columbia, MD, USA) at a flow rate of 1.0 ml/min using HPLC. The mobile phases consisting buffer A (0.02% NH4OH in water) and buffer B (0.02% NH4OH in 80% ACN) were used to establish 60-min gradient as 97% buffer A for 3 min, 3–10% buffer B for 2 min, 10–35% buffer B for 40 min, 35–70% buffer B for 5 min and 100% buffer B for 10 min at 1 ml/min flow rate. HPLC chromatograms were recorded at 280 nm and sixty fractions were collected using an automated fraction collector. The collected fractions were pooled according to concatenate pooling method, concentrated using vacuum centrifuge, and reconstituted in 0.1% formic acid for LC-MS/MS analysis.
The LC-MS/MS analysis was performed using the Dionex Ultimate 3000 RSLC nanoLC system coupled to a Q-Exactive apparatus (Thermo Fisher, MA). 5μl sample was injected into an acclaim peptide trap column via the autosampler of the Dionex RSLC nanoLC system. Mobile phase A (0.1% FA in 5% ACN) and mobile phase B (0.1% FA in ACN) were used to establish a 60 min gradient. The flow rate was maintained at 300 nl/min. Peptides were analyzed on a Dionex EASY-spray column (PepMap® C18, 3um, 100A) using an EASY nanospray source at an electrospray potential of 1.5 kV. MS scan (350–1600 m/z range) was acquired at a resolution of 70,000 at m/z 200, with a maximum ion accumulation time of 100 ms. Dynamic exclusion was set to 30 s. Resolution for MS/MS spectra was set to 35,000 at m/z 200. The AGC setting was 1E6 for the full MS scan and 2E5 for the MS2 scan. The 10 most intense ions above a 1000 count threshold were selected for HCD fragmentation, with a maximum ion accumulation time of 120 ms. An isolation width of 2 Da was used for the MS2 scan. Single and unassigned charged ions were excluded from MS/MS. For HCD, normalized collision energy was set to 28. The underfill ratio was defined as 0.1%.
Mitochondria isolation by anti-TOM22 magnetic beads and label free proteomics
Brain tissue lysates were prepared using the Mitochondria Extraction Kit (Miltenyi Biotec, Bergisch Gladbach, Germany) according to the manufacturer’s instructions. In brief, 100 mg brain tissues were cut into small pieces and digested with extraction Buffer. After a centrifugation at 300×g for 5 min at 4°C, the pellet was re-suspended in buffer supplemented with protease inhibitor cocktail and was quickly homogenized using the Gentle MACS Dissociator (Miltenyi Biotec). Mitochondria were magnetically enriched by labeling with 50 μl of anti-TOM22 MicroBeads in separation buffer for 1 h at 4°C. The suspension was then loaded onto an LS column (Miltenyi Biotec) in a magnetic field, which had been placed in a MACS Separator. After washing the column with separation buffer, it was removed from the MACS separator and the magnetically labeled mitochondria were eluted with 1.5 ml separation buffer, centrifuged at 13,000 x g for 2 min, and the pellet was suspended in storage buffer. Before further analysis, the eluates were centrifuged at 12,000 g for 3 min at 4°C. The mitochondrial pellet was re-suspended in PBS buffer. 40μg of protein was loaded to SDS-PAGE and run at 100v for 60 min. Samples were digested and LC-MS/MS analysis was performed according to our earlier protocol.
Mass spectrometric data analysis
Acquired data was further processed using Proteome Discoverer (PD) v1.4 (Thermo Scientific, San Jose, USA) with deisotope and deconvolution in MS/MS. The raw files were directly imported into the PD and further processed using designed workflow. Briefly, this workflow includes five processing nodes numbered from 0 to 5. Node 0 named “spectrum file” allows selecting raw files, node 1 labeled as “spectrum selector” extracts, deisotopes, and deconvolutes the spectra within a retention time window and precursor ion mass window. Node 2 selected search engine SequestHT and Node 3 used Mascot with database search parameters. The parameters set were enzyme: trypsin, maximum miss cleavage: 2, minimum peptide length: 6, maximum peptide length: 144, precursor mass tolerance: 10 ppm, fragment mass tolerance: 0.02 Da, dynamic modification: deamidation of Q and N. Node 5 called “percolator” where target FDR (strict) was set as 0.01, target FDR (relaxed) was set as 0.05. Node 4 named reporter ions quantifier, where the parameter set were Quantification method: iTRAQ 4Plex, peak integration tolerance: 10 ppm, integration method: most confident centroid, mass analyzer: FTMS, MS order: MS2, activation type: HCD, minimum collision energy; 0 and maximum collision energy: 100. Database search was performed against the UniProt human database (sequence 88,473, downloaded on April 2015). The obtained peptide/protein list was exported to Microsoft Excel or processed using an in-house script for further analysis. These proteins were further subjected to MitoCarta database to find the mitochondrial origin. Online Gene Pattern software (http://genepattern.broadinstitute.org) was used for the hierarchical clustering.
Western blot analysis
Brain proteins were separated on 15% polyacrylamide gels, transferred onto 0.45-μm nitrocellulose membrane (BioRad, Hercules, CA), blocked and probed overnight at 4 °C with the primary antibodies. Monoclonal Antibodies against NDUFA9 and NDUFAB1 (Abcam) were used in this study. ImageJ software used to analyze western blot images.
Additional files