ABSTRACT:
Repo-Man is a protein phosphatase 1 (PP1) targeting subunit that regulates mitotic progression and chromatin remodelling. After mitosis, Repo-Man/PP1 remains associated with chromatin but its function in interphase is not known. Here we show that Repo-Man, via Nup153, is enriched on condensed chromatin at the nuclear periphery and at the edge of the nucleopore basket. Repo-Man/PP1 regulates the formation of heterochromatin, dephosphorylates H3S28 and it is necessary and sufficient for heterochromatin protein 1 binding and H3K27me3 recruitment. Using a novel proteogenomic approach, we show that Repo-Man is enriched at subtelomeric regions together with H2AZ and H3.3 and that depletion of Repo-Man alters the peripheral localization of a subset of these regions and alleviates repression of some polycomb telomeric genes. This study shows a role for a mitotic phosphatase in the regulation of the epigenetic landscape and gene expression in interphase.
Repo-Man is a chromosome-binding subunit of protein phosphatase 1 to regulate mitosis. Here, de Castro and colleagues show that Repo-Man also regulates heterochromatin during interphase, and regulates gene repression and chromatin organization.
METHODS:
Methods
Cell culture, cloning and transfections
HT1080 and HeLa cells were grown in DMEM supplemented with 10% fetal bovine serum (FBS) and 1% Penicillin–Streptomycin (Invitrogen Gibco) at 37 °C with 5% CO2.
DT40 cells carrying a single integration of the LacO array were cultured in RPMI1640 supplemented with 10% FBS and 1% chicken serum at 39 °C and 5% CO2.
Transient transfections for DT40 in LacO array background were conducted as previously described using GFP-fused LacI, LacI:RMWT, LacI:RMRAXA LacI:KI67PP1BD constructs.
For RNAi treatments, HeLa cells in exponential growth were seeded in six-well plates containing glass coverslips and grown overnight. Transfections were performed using Polyplus jetPRIME (PEQLAB, Southampton, UK) with the indicated siRNA oligos and analysed at 48 h after transfection as previously described. For the rescue experiments HeLa cells at 50% confluence were transfected with 400 ng of plasmid DNA and 50 nM of siRNA oligonucleotides and analysed 48 h post-transfection. The siRNA oligonucleotides against Repo-Man (CDCA2) and SDS22 (PPP1R7) were obtained from Qiagen, Hs_CDCA2_5 and PPP1R7_7, respectively, Nup153_1 5′-GGCAGACUCUACCAAAUGUtt-3′ and Nup153_2 5′-GGACUUGUUAGAUCUAGUUtt-3′, and finally CGUACGCGGAAUACUUCGAdTdT was used as a control. For rescue experiments, as in Fig. 3a, the oligo 5′-UGACAGACUUGACCAGAAATT-3′ was used instead of Hs_CDCA2_5.
Constructs and cell lines used in this study, were generated in Vagnarelli et al.; HP1:GFP and Nup153:GFP construct were a kind gifts from Schirmer Lab (Welcome Trust Edinburgh) and Ullman Lab (University of Utah), respectively.
Immunofluorescence microscopy
Cells were fixed in 4% PFA and processed as previously described. Primary antibodies were used as in Supplementary Table 1. Fluorescence-labelled secondary antibodies were applied at 1:200 (Jackson ImmunoResearch). Three-dimensional data sets were acquired using a wide-field microscope (NIKON Ti-E super research Live Cell imaging system) with a numerical aperture (NA) 1.45 Plan Apochromat lens. The data sets were deconvolved with NIS Elements AR analysis software (NIKON). Three-dimensional data sets were converted to Maximum Projection in the NIS software, exported as TIFF files, and imported into Adobe Photoshop for final presentation.
Live cell imaging was performed with a Nikon Ti-E super research live cell imaging system microscope as previously described.
For quantification of the staining in RNAi background masks were created around the DAPI nuclei. Mean intensity of antibodies signals were extracted and background was subtracted. For quantification of enrichment in LacI/LacO systems, three circles were designed around the LacI spot, within the nucleus and outside the cell and signals intensities were extracted. The outside circle served as background and was subtracted from both the nuclear and the LacI spot, then the signal intensity from the LacI was normalized relative to the intensity of the nuclear signal.
PLA
Proximity ligation assay was performed according to the manufacturer's protocol (Sigma). HeLa cells were fixed, permeabilized and blocked with BSA as previously described. The antibodies were used at a concentration as per Supplementary Table 1. PLA probes were added and ligation was performed following manufacturer instructions (Sigma). Coverslips were mounted on DAPI and observed on the previously mentioned wide-field NIKON microscope. Spots lying within nuclear masks were counted in control and Repo-Man siRNA experiments.
Quantitative real-time PCR
RNA was collected from RNAi treated HeLa cells and extracted using the Tissue and Cells RNA Isolation Kit (Mobio) according to manufacturer's protocol. One microgram of RNA was used to prepare cDNA using the cDNA synthesis kit (Thermo Scientific) and oligo(dT) primers according to manufacturer's instructions. qPCR was quantified using SYBR green Master Mix (Thermo Scientific) and according to manufacturer's instructions (primers in Supplementary Table 2). Delta–delta CT method was used with normalization for GAPDH.
Immunoelectron microscopy
Cells were fixed in 2 × 4% paraformaldehyde, 0.2% glutaraldehyde in PHEM buffer (60 mM PIPES, 25 mM HEPES, 2 mM MgCl2, 10 mM EGTA, pH6.9) for 60 min. Then 1 × fix was added without the glutaraldehyde. Cells were scraped off the culture dish, pelleted, stored 1–2 days, resuspended in 15% PVP, 1.7 M sucrose in 0.1 M phosphate buffer with 33 mM Na2CO3, pH 7.4 and frozen in liquid nitrogen. Frozen pellets were sectioned on a cryo-ultramicrotome (Leica, UC6 with FC6 cryo-attachment). Cryosections, retrieved in 15% PVP, 1.7 M sucrose, were thawed, rinsed in PBS with 1% glycine, incubated in PBS with 1% BSA, incubated with rabbit anti-GFP antibody (Abcam) at 1:100 dilution, rinsed in PBS then incubated with the secondary anti-rabbit 10 nm colloidal gold (BBI Solutions). Grids were then rinsed in PBS, transferred to 1% glutaraldehyde (Agar Scientific) in PBS, washed in water and embedded in 2% methyl cellulose containing 0.4% uranyl acetate (Agar Scientific). Images were taken on a Hitachi H7600 electron microscope at 100 kV. For quantification of gold labelling, 50 images were acquired at a magnification of 60,000 times, corresponding to 5 μm2 of cell area. Analysis was carried out using Fiji. The Freehand selection tool was used to measure the total nuclear area within the images analysed, delineated by the inner nuclear membrane or the edge of the image, as well as to estimate the area of the peripheral heterochromatin. Distinct nuclear bodies were only analysed if they were labelled.
In vitro binding array
The peptide array was purchased from Active Motif. GST: Repo-Man403-1023 GST: Repo-Man1-135 (ref.) or GST alone was expressed in Rosetta and purified on glutathione beads (Thermo Scientific). One micromolar of protein was processed onto the histone peptide array using the anti-GST (Pierce CAB4169, 1:1,000) and c-myc (positive control) as described by the manufacturer (Active Motif). LiCor secondary antibodies (LiCor IRDye 800CW and 680RD at 1:3,000 dilution) were used to allow imaging with the Odyssey system. Arrays were analysed through manufacturer's software.
Preparation of Repo-Man bound nucleosomes
Chromatin was extracted from HeLa cells and digested with Micrococcal Nuclease (NEB, 37 °C, 20 min) and incubated overnight (4 °C) with either GST:Repo-Man or GST alone glutathione beads (Thermo Scientific) in binding buffer (50 mM TRIS, 1 mM CaCl2, 4 mM MgCl2, 0.32 M sucrose, 150 mM NaCl and 0.1% NP-40). Bound fraction was washed with binding buffer and eluted with glutathione reduced. DNA extracted and sequenced in Illumina HiSeq2500.
Protein assays and quantitative immunoblotting
HeLa cells were pelleted and prepared for blotting either through sonication in SDS sample buffer or fractionated according to the Subcellular Protein Fractionation Kit (Thermo Scientific). Membranes were incubated with primary antibodies as in Supplementary Table 1 and subsequently with IRDye-labelled secondary antibodies (LiCor). Fluorescence intensities were determined using an LiCor Odyssey CCD scanner according to manufacturer's instructions (LiCor Biosciences).
Mass spectrometry
Part of the chromatin eluted from the GST:Repo-Man or GST alone was loaded on an SDS–PAGE then stained with Instant Blue (Expedeon). The regions of gel containing the histones were excised and sent for Mass spectrometry.
Excised gel bands were de-stained and proteins were digested with trypsin, as previously described. In brief, proteins were reduced in 10 mM dithiothreitol (Sigma) for 30 min at 37 °C and alkylated in 55 mM iodoacetamide (Sigma) for 20 min at ambient temperature in the dark. They were then digested overnight at 37 °C with 12.5 ng μl-1 trypsin (Pierce).
MS-analyses were performed either on an LTQ-Orbitrap mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific) or on a Q Exactive mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific) both coupled on-line to Ultimate 3000 RSLCnano Systems (Dionex, Thermo Scientific).
The MaxQuant software platform version 1.5.1.2 was used to process the raw files and search was conducted against Homo sapiens complete/reference proteome set of UniProt database (released on 14/05/2014), using the Andromeda search engine. For the first search peptide tolerance was set to 20 p.p.m. while for the main search peptide tolerance was set to 4.5 pm. Isotope mass tolerance was 2 p.p.m. and maximum charge to 7. Digestion mode was set to specific with trypsin allowing maximum of two missed cleavages. Carbamidomethylation of cysteine was set as fixed modification. Oxidation of methionine, acetylation, single, di- and tri-methylation of lysine, as well as single and di-methylation of arginine were set as variable modifications. Peptide and protein identifications were filtered to 1% FDR.
Histone PTM were detected only amongst the three GST:Repo-ManCTerm data sets and none on GST alone. Histone variants peptide counts mentioned in the text (H2AZ) or represented in Fig. 5a were over-represented in the GST:Repo-ManCTerm (at least 3-fold) when compared with GST alone.
For the characterization of serine 28 phosphorylation during mitosis, cells were grown overnight with nocodazole and mitotic extracts were collected and ran on a gel and stained with Instant Blue (Expedeon). The histone bands were excised for Mass Spectrometry. For the determination of the degree of phosphorylation on H3S28 two similar histone gel bands were digested as previously described. Before the addition of trypsin one of the samples was treated with alkaline phosphatase for 30 min at 37 °C. The analyses of phosphorylated S28 peptides was conducted as described in Steen et al.
Bioinformatic analyses
Sequencing libraries were constructed, quantified and analysed according to standard protocols. Sequencing libraries were constructed on the Apollo 324 Next Generation Sample Preparation system (Wafergen) using the PrepX Complete ILMN 32i DNA Library Kit (Wafergen) according to the manufacturer's guidelines. The prepared libraries were quantified and multiplexed before 50-nt paired end sequencing on a HiSeq2500 (Rapid mode) according to standard Illumina protocols. Approximately 60–80 million read pairs were produced per sample and mapped to the human reference genome (hs37d5 version of build 37). Bam files from individual sequencing lanes were merged using Picard (Picard, http://broadinstitute.github.io/picard/). Mapped reads were analysed for standard ChIP-Seq quality metrics; in particular, for each sample, the Normalized Strand Cross-correlation was>1.05 and the Relative Strand Cross-correlation coefficients was >0.8, suggesting a good degree of enrichment for the protein of interest, in agreement with. Peaks were called using the software MACS2 with default parameters for narrow regions. Peaks located on unlocalized genomic contigs (for example, GL000192.1 or hs37d5) were excluded from the final set of significantly enriched regions. The sequences obtained with the GST alone were subtracted from the data sets.
Using a 5% FDR cut-off, 7550 binding sites were detected from the first and 4201 from the second duplicate. A stringent approach was applied to select 634 Repo-Man binding sites resulting from the union of common sites found in replicates 1 and 2.
HeLa broad peaks of histone markers and chromatin proteins of interest were downloaded from the ENCODE depository (https://genome.ucsc.edu/ENCODE/) and compared with Repo-Man-binding sites in terms of overlapping peaks using a Python script. UCSC Genome browser was used to visualize Repo-Man and ENCODE data sets.
Characterization of Repo-Man binding sites was performed using ChromHMM states downloaded from the Roadmap Epigenomics Database for the HeLa epigenome and using a 15-state Hidden Markov Model (HMM).
Subtelomeric regions were defined as 500-kb windows adjacent to the terminal fragment of each chromosome as in Yang et al.
Chromosome positioning
HT1080 cell line carrying a LacO integration on chromosome 13q22 and expressing a LacI:GFP (kindly provided by W Bickmore) was used with RNAi for Repo-Man as described before. Images of LacI:GFP co-stained with Nup153 were taken and analysed with the nuclear erosion scrip to assess chromosome 13q22 location in relation to each of the five concentric shells.
3D FISH
The PAC CTC-820M16, localized in the subtelomeric region of chromosome 14 (14q32.33, Chr14:107106019-107206128 Ensemble draft 75 (ref.)) was labelled by nick translation with digoxigenin –dUTP (Roche), using the Abbott Molecular Nick Translation kit, as per manufacturer instructions. The 22-14 alpha satellite probe p14.1 (ref.) was similarly labelled with biotin-dUTP.
For 3D FISH, the transfected cells were incubated in CSK buffer (0.1 M NaCl; 0.3 M Sucrose; 0.003 M MgCl2; 0.01 M Pipes) for 10 min, and then fixed in 2% formaldehyde/1 × PBS for 5 min. Cells permeabilization was carried out in 0.5% Triton X-100/1 × PBS for 20 min. Following an incubation in 0.1 N HCl for 10 min, and a wash in 2 × SCC, the probes were applied onto the cells, and the probe and nuclear DNA were denatured simultaneously at 85 °C for 5 min. The slides were incubated at 37 °C. The following day, slides were washed three times in 0.1 × SSC at 65 °C.
The probes were detected with anti-digoxigenin antibody, conjugated with rhodamine (Roche), or avidin Alexa Fluor 488 Conjugate (Invitrogen), both at 5 μg ml−1, and the slides mounted in Vectashield DAPI (Oncor). Images were acquired with an Olympus BX-51 epifluorescence microscope coupled to a JAI CVM4+ CCD camera, with Leica Cytovision Genus v7.1.
Chromatin immunoprecipitation
ChIP was performed using the ChIP-IT express kit (Active Motif) according to Manual's Instructions. The protocol was erformed on RNAi treated HeLa cells and using 10 μl of H3K27me2/3 antibody (Active Motif, 39535) and digoxin as a negative control (Jackson Laboratories, 200-002-156). After ChIP, DNA was purified using Phenol Chloroform and ethanol precipitation with glycogen. DNA concentration was measured using Qubit (High Sensitivity Kit, Thermo) and reduced to 0.2 ng μl. qPCR was quantified using SYBR green Master Mix (Thermo Scientific) and according to manufacturer's instructions (primers in Supplementary Table 2). Delta–delta CT method was used with normalization for Input DNA. MYT1 gene was used as a control for H3K27me2/3 enrichment.
Data availability
Mass Spec data generated in this study have been deposited in PRIDE under accession number PXD004613. Hi-Seq data generated in this study have been deposited on Gene Expression Omnibus under GEO accession number GSE84035. The microscopy data are available from the corresponding author upon request and will be released via figshare.
Additional information
How to cite this article: de Castro, I. J. et al. Repo-Man/PP1 regulates heterochromatin formation in interphase. Nat. Commun. 8, 14048 doi: 10.1038/ncomms14048 (2017).
Publisher's note: Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps and institutional affiliations.