ABSTRACT:
Integrins are heterodimeric glycoproteins that bind cells to extracellular matrix. Upon integrin clustering, multimolecular integrin adhesion complexes (IACs) are formed, creating links to the cell cytoskeleton. We have previously observed decreased cell migration and increased sensitivity to microtubule (MT) poisons, paclitaxel and vincristine, in the melanoma cell line MDA-MB-435S upon transfection with integrin αV-specific siRNA, suggesting a link between adhesion and drug sensitivity. To elucidate the underlying mechanism, we determined αV-dependent changes in IAC composition. Using mass spectrometry (MS)-based proteomics, we analyzed the components of isolated IACs of MDA-MB-435S cells and two MDA-MB-435S-derived integrin αV-specific shRNA-expressing cell clones with decreased expression of integrin αV. MS analysis showed that cells preferentially use integrin αVβ5 for the formation of IACs. The differential analysis between MDA-MB-435S cells and clones with decreased expression of integrin αV identified key components of integrin αVβ5 adhesion complexes as talins 1 and 2, α-actinins 1 and 4, filamins A and B, plectin and vinculin. The data also revealed decreased levels of several components of the cortical microtubule stabilization complex, which recruits MTs to adhesion sites (notably liprins α and β, ELKS, LL5β, MACF1, KANK1, and KANK2), following αV knockdown. KANK2 knockdown in MDA-MB-435S cells mimicked the effect of integrin αV knockdown and resulted in increased sensitivity to MT poisons and decreased migration. Taken together, we conclude that KANK2 is a key molecule linking integrin αVβ5 IACs to MTs, and enabling the actin-MT crosstalk that is important for both sensitivity to MT poisons and cell migration.
METHODS:
Materials and Methods
Cells and Isolation of Stable Cell Clones
Human melanoma cell line MDA-MB-435S (a spindle-shaped variant of the parental MDA-MB-435) was obtained from the American Type Culture Collection (ATCC, United States). Cells were grown in DMEM (Invitrogen, United States), and supplemented with 10% (v/v) FBS (Invitrogen, United States) at 37°C with 5% CO2 (v/v) in a humidified atmosphere. To construct MDA-MB-435S clones with decreased expression of integrin αV subunit, pSUPER vector system for the expression of shRNA was used (OligoEngine, United States). Briefly, oligonucleotides were constructed according to the sequence of siRNA specific for integrin subunit αV (s7568- Ambion, United States), previously used in transient transfection in the same cell model. Oligonucleotides P1 – GATCCCCGAATATCGGTTGGATTATATTCAAGAGA TATAATCCAACCGATATTCTTTTTA and P2 – AGCTTAAA AAGAATATCGGTTGGATTATATCTCTTGAATATAATCCAA CCGATATTCGGG were annealed and cloned into HindIII (NEB, United Kingdom) and BglII (Thermo Fisher Scientific, United States) digested vector. Resulting plasmid pSuper shαV was purified using Miniprep columns (Qiagen, Germany) and transfected into MDA-MB-435S cells using Lipofectamine (Thermo Fisher Scientific, United States). Clones 2αV and 3αV were selected using puromycin (0.2 μg/ml, Sigma-Aldrich, United States) according to expression of integrin αV measured by flow cytometry.
Drugs, Chemicals, Determination of Cell Survival, and Transient siRNA Transfection
Cis-diamminedichloroplatinum (cisplatin, CDDP) was dissolved in water and stored at −20°C. Vincristine and paclitaxel (all Sigma-Aldrich, United States) were dissolved in phosphate-buffered saline (PBS) and DMSO, respectively, and stored at −20°C. The 3-((4,5-dimethylthiazol-2-yl)-2,5-diphenyltetrazolium bromide) (MTT) (Millipore, United States) was dissolved in PBS and stored at 4°C. The sensitivity of cells to antitumor drugs was determined using MTT assay. Briefly, 24 h after seeding in 96-well tissue culture plates (1–1.2 × 104 cells/well) cells were treated with different concentrations of antitumor drugs. Seventy-two hours later, the absorbance of MTT-formazan product dissolved in DMSO was measured with a microplate reader (Awareness Technology, Inc., United States) at 600 nm. Single siRNA specific for KANK2 (target sequence ATGTCAACGTGCAAGATGA; Sigma-Aldrich) was used at 20 nM, validated by western blot analysis (WB) and immunofluorescence (IF) using KANK2 specific antibody as previously described (Supplementary Table S1). Twenty-four hours after KANK2 knockdown cells were used in MTT or migration assays.
Determination of Cell Migration
For monitoring cell migration, serum-starved (24 h) cells [8 × 104 cells in 0.5 mL of DMEM containing 0.1% (w/v) BSA] were placed in the Transwell Cell Culture Inserts (pore size, 8 μm) (Corning, United States) and left to migrate for 22 h toward 10% (v/v) FBS in DMEM as a chemoattractant. Cells on the upper side of the filters were removed with cotton-tipped swabs, the filters were fixed in paraformaldehyde for 15 min and stained with 1% (w/v) crystal violet in PBS for 90 min. Cells on the underside of the filters were photographed using Olympus BX51TF microscope (five images/sample). The number of cells was determined using ImageJ (NIH, United States) software.
Determination of Integrin αVβ3, αVβ5, αV, and β1 Expression by Flow Cytometry
Flow cytometry to analyze the expression of αVβ3, αVβ5, αV, and β1 was performed using integrin subunit- or heterodimer-specific monoclonal antibodies (MAb). Briefly, adherent cells were grown in tissue culture dishes, detached by EDTA (Invitrogen, United States) and washed twice with PBS. Membrane fluorescence staining was performed using unlabeled primary antibodies (1 h, 4°C) while its binding was revealed by incubation (30 min, 4°C) of FITC-conjugated anti-mouse antibody. Isotype control samples were incubated with mouse IgG1 followed by FITC-conjugated anti-mouse antibody. Flow cytometry experiments were performed using FACSCalibur, while cell acquisition was made using BD CellQuest software package (all BD Biosciences, United States). Data were analyzed using FCS Express 3 (De Novo Software, United States) software. All antibodies are listed in Supplementary Table S1.
Assessment of Apoptosis and Cell Proliferation
The induction of apoptosis in MDA-MB-435S, 2αV, and 3αV cells was determined by the Annexin V-FITC (BD Pharmingen, Germany)/PI double-staining. Cells were treated for 72 h with PTX (0.004 μg/mL) and apoptosis was measured by flow cytometry. To monitor cell proliferation, Click-iT® assay was used according to the manufacturer’s instructions (Thermo Fisher Scientific, United States). Briefly, 2.75 × 105 cells/well were seeded on 6-well plate and grown for 72 h in DMEM supplemented with 10% (v/v) FBS. Two hours before harvesting, modified thymidine analog EdU (5-ethynyl-2′-deoxyuridine, final concentration 10 μM) was added. Cells were collected, fixed with 4% (w/v) paraformaldehyde, permeabilized with saponin, stained with AF 488 azide (in the presence of CuSO4) and analyzed by flow cytometry. To determine the proliferation rate, the frequencies of the proliferative (EdU +) cells were compared.
Confocal Microscopy and Live Cell Imaging
For confocal microscopy, 48 h after being seeded on coverslips, cells were fixed with 2% (w/v) paraformaldehyde (methanol was used only when staining of α-tubulin/KANK2 was performed), permeabilized with 0.1% (v/v) Triton X-100, incubated with the appropriate antibodies for 1 h, followed by incubation with the appropriate secondary antibody for 1 h. F-actin fibers were stained with rhodamine phalloidin (Sigma-Aldrich, United States) while MTs were stained with antibody against α-tubulin (Sigma-Aldrich, United States), and slides mounted in DAPI Fluoromount-G (SouthernBiotech, United States) (all antibodies are listed in Supplementary Table S1). Fluorescence and respective IRM images were acquired using HC PL APOCS2 63 × /1.40 oil-immersion objective on an inverted confocal microscope (Leica TCS SP8 X, Leica Microsystems, Germany), with the focus adjusted to the adhesion sites of cells at the upper surface of glass coverslip. Images were analyzed using LAS X (Leica Microsystems, Germany) and ImageJ (NIH, United States) software. For quantification of FA proteins/KANK2, images were processed using ImageJ and threshold was set to restrict analysis to sites where the signals from the protein staining overlaps with the F-actin/MT staining at the tip of the actin stress fibers/MT fibers. For the stress fiber quantification, only those fibers that end with FAs, marked by paxillin staining, were identified as stress fibers and quantified using ImageJ. For time-lapse live cell imaging, cells were seeded on 35 mm glass bottom dishes (Ibidi, Martinsried, Germany) and 2–3 fields containing cells were imaged every 44 s for 18–20 h using HC PL APOCS2 40 × /1.30 oil-immersion objective on the Leica TCS SP8 X microscope equipped with a top stage incubator at 37°C. Images were analyzed using LAS X. EVOS cell imaging system (Thermo Fisher Scientific, United States) was used to obtain cell morphology images of cells seeded in 6-well plates, every 24 h for a 72 h period. Images were analyzed using ImageJ (NIH, United States) software.
Isolation of IACs, Sample Preparation for Mass Spectrometry, and Data Analysis
Integrin adhesion complexes were isolated as previously described. In short, cells (2–2.5 × 106, depending on cell clone, to obtain similar cell number 48 h later) were plated on 10 cm diameter cell culture dishes (at least six dishes per cell line) and grown in DMEM supplemented with 10% (v/v) FBS. After 48 h, the medium was removed, cells were washed with DMEM-HEPES and incubated with Wang and Richard’s reagent for 5 min (6 mM DTBP, Thermo Fisher Scientific, United States). At the same time, cells in an additional plate were counted to ensure equal cell number per sample. DTBP was quenched by 0.03M Tris-HCl (pH 8) and cells were lysed using modified RIPA buffer. Cell bodies were removed by high-pressure washing and remaining adhesions were collected by scraping. Samples containing isolated IACs were acetone precipitated, dissolved in Laemmli buffer and further processed either for MS or WB analysis.
Samples were prepared as previously described, using a slightly modified procedure. Briefly, samples were loaded onto gradient gels (NuPage 4–12% Bis-Tris protein gels, Thermo Fisher Scientific, United Kingdom) and electrophoresis was performed for 3 min (200V). Protein bands were stained with InstantBlue (Expedeon, United Kingdom), followed by excision and destaining using series of alternate washing steps with ammonium bicarbonate (Fluka, United States) and acetonitrile (Thermo Fisher Scientific, United Kingdom). Washing and drying steps were made in 96-well perforated plates (GlySci, United States). Gel pieces were dried with acetonitrile and additional drying was performed using vacuum centrifuge. Samples were reduced with dithiothreitol (DTT, 1 h at 56°C) and alkylated using 55 mM iodoacetamide (37°C, 45 min, dark) (both Sigma-Aldrich, United States). After series of washing and drying steps, gel pieces were incubated with trypsin (1.25 ng/μL, Promega, United States) and incubated for 45 min at 4°C, followed by an overnight incubation at 37°C. Peptides were collected and extracted using acetonitrile supplemented with formic acid (Sigma-Aldrich, United States), then dried and resuspended in a solution of 5% (v/v) acetonitrile plus 0.1% (v/v) formic acid. Peptides were desalted using OLIGO R3 beads (Life technologies, United States) using 96-well plates with PVDF membranes (Corning, United States). Desalting was performed with a 0.1% formic acid wash steps before being eluted twice with 50% acetonitrile in 0.1% formic acid. Peptides were subsequently dried and resuspended in a solution of 5% (v/v) acetonitrile plus 0.1% (v/v) formic acid for LC-MS/MS analysis.
Samples were analyzed using a modified version of the LC-MS/MS method previously described. Briefly, an UltiMate® 3000 Rapid Separation LC (RSLC, United States) coupled to an Orbitrap Elite mass detector (Thermo Fisher Scientific, United States) with electrospray ionization. Peptide mixtures were eluted for 44 min using a gradient containing 92% of solution A (0.1% formic acid in water) and 8% up to 33% of solution B (0.1% formic acid in acetonitrile). Solvent flow was set to 300 nL per minute. To identify proteins, data were searched against the human Swissprot database (version 2018_01) using Mascot (Matrix science, version 2.5.1). Fragment ion tolerance was set to 0.50 Da, while parent ion tolerance was 5 PPM. Protein identifications were further refined using Scaffold (Proteome software). Protein (99.9%) and peptide (95%) probabilities were assigned using the Protein Prophet algorithm as incorporated by Scaffold including a minimum of four unique peptides per each protein.
PPI Network Formation, Functional Enrichment, Gene Ontology Analysis, and MS Data Visualization
Human protein–protein interactions were loaded from STRING database, using stringApp (confidence score cut-off = 0.40, maximum additional interactors = 0) for Cytoscape software (version 3.7.1). Functional annotation was performed using the Database for annotation, visualization and integrated discovery (DAVID), version 6.8 and Panther GO database, while the literature search was performed in case of cortical stabilization microtubule complex.
Functional enrichment was performed using DAVID_CC subontology list (Benjamini–Hochberg corrected P-value < 0.05, EASE score < 0.1, at least four identified proteins). To summarize the gene ontology terms and place them in similarity-based space, REViGO tool, with the following setup (comparison of corrected P-values related to GO terms were used, allowed similarity: small (0.5), semantic similarity measure to use: Resnik-normalized) was used. QSpec Spectral counter tool was used to provide the statistical measure of differentially expressed proteins in MDA-MB-435S versus 2αV datasets and MDA-MB-435S versus 3αV datasets. For visualization of differentially expressed proteins, volcano plot (GraphPad Prism) with the following setup was created: fold change > 1.5 (MDA MB 435S/2αV and MDA MB 435S/3αV, respectively), −log(FDR) > 1. Fold change was calculated according to Qspec output values.
Western Blot Analysis
Isolated IACs from at least six 10 cm diameter culture dishes were mixed with 2x loading buffer and heated for 20 min at 70°C. Proteins were loaded onto gradient pre-cast gels (Biorad, United States), separated with SDS-PAGE and transferred to a nitrocellulose membrane (Amersham, Germany). For assessment of successful KANK2 knockdown cells were lysed using RIPA buffer, mixed with 5x loading buffer, separated by SDS-PAGE and transferred to nitrocellulose membrane (Amersham, Germany). The membrane was blocked in 5% (w/v) non-fat dry milk, and incubated with the appropriate antibodies, followed by incubation with horseradish peroxidase-coupled secondary antibody (GE Healthcare, United States, Invitrogen, United States) (Supplementary Table S1). Detection was performed using chemiluminescence (GE Healthcare) and visualized using iBright CL1000 (Thermo Fisher Scientific, United States).
Statistical Analysis
Each experiment was repeated at least three times, and GraphPad Prism v5.0 (GraphPad Software, United States) was used to analyze the data. All data from MTT experiments were analyzed by unpaired Student’s t-test, and expressed as mean ± standard deviation (SD). ns, not significant; ∗P < 0.05; ∗∗P < 0.01; ∗∗∗P < 0.001. Data obtained from migration and IF were analyzed by related measure one-way ANOVA with Dunnett’s multiple comparison: ∗P < 0.05, ∗∗P < 0.01, ∗∗∗P < 0.001.