ABSTRACT:
Phosphoproteomics requires better separation of phosphopeptides to boost the coverage of the phosphoproteome. We argue that an alternative separation method that produces orthogonal phosphopeptide separation to the widely used LC needs to be considered. Capillary zone electrophoresis (CZE) is one important alternative because CZE and LC are orthogonal for phosphopeptide separation and because the migration time of peptides in CZE can be accurately predicted. In this work, we coupled strong cation exchange (SCX)-reversed-phase LC (RPLC) to CZE-MS/MS for large-scale phosphoproteomics of the colon carcinoma HCT116 cell line. The CZE-MS/MS-based platform identified 11,555 phosphopeptides. The phosphopeptide dataset is at least 100% larger than that from previous CZE-MS/MS studies and will be a valuable resource for building a model for predicting the migration time of phosphopeptides in CZE. Phosphopeptides migrate significantly slower than corresponding unphosphopeptides under acidic conditions of CZE separations and in a normal polarity. According to our modeling data, phosphorylation decreases peptide’s charge roughly by one charge unit, resulting in dramatic decrease in electrophoretic mobility. Preliminary investigations demonstrate that electrophoretic mobility of phosphopeptides containing one phosphoryl group can be predicted with the same accuracy as for non-modified peptides (R2 ~0.99). The CZE-MS/MS and LC-MS/MS were complementary in large-scale phosphopeptide identifications and produced different phosphosite motifs from the HCT116 cell line. The data highlight the value of CZE-MS/MS for phosphoproteomics as a complementary separation approach for not only improving the phosphoproteome coverage but also providing more insight into the phosphosite motifs.
Graphical Abstract
METHODS:
Experimental section
Materials and reagents
All reagents were bought from Sigma-Aldrich (St. Louis, MO) unless stated otherwise. LC/MS grade water, formic acid (FA), methanol, acetonitrile (ACN), HPLC grade acetic acid (AA) and hydrofluoric acid (HF) were purchased from Fisher Scientific (Pittsburgh, PA). Acrylamide was obtained from Acros Organics (NJ, USA). Fused silica capillaries (50 μm i.d./360 μm o.d.) were purchased from Polymicro Technologies (Phoenix, AZ).
Cell Growth Conditions
The human colon carcinoma cell line HCT 116 was obtained from American Type Culture Collection (ATCC). The cells were grown in RPMI 1640 cell culture medium (Life Technologies) supplemented with 10% fetal bovine serum (FBS) (Thermo Scientific). The provider assured authentication of the cell line by cytogenetic analysis. In addition, the cell line was validated by short tandem repeat (STR) analysis within the last two years.
Sample Preparation and phosphorylated peptide enrichment
A lysis buffer with 8 M urea with 75 mM NaCI, 50 mM Tris-HCI (pH 8.2), 10 mM sodium pyrophosphate, 1 mM PMSF, 1 mM Na3VO4, 1 mM NaF, 1 mM β-glycerophosphate, and 1 EDTA-free protease inhibitor cocktail was prepared. HCT116 colon cancer cells were cultured to 70% confluence followed by cell lysis with the lysis buffer. A small aliquot of the cell lysate was subjected to the Bicinchoninic acid assay for protein concentration measurement. Three mg of extracted protein was subjected to denaturation at 37 °C for 1 h, reduction with 5 mM Dithiothreitol (DTT) at 37 °C for 1 h, and alkylation with 14 mM iodoacetamide (IAA) for 30 min at room temperature. The alkylation was terminated by adding 5 mM DTT for 25 min. The sample was then diluted with 25 mM Tris-HCI buffer (pH 8.2) with 1 mM CaCl2. Trypsin was added to the sample for overnight digestion at 37 °C. Phosphopeptides in the desalted digest were enriched with TiO2 beads in a 1:4 peptides to beads ratio based on the references and. After enrichment, the phosphopeptides were desalted, lyophilized and stored at −80 °C before use. We assumed 70% recovery during tryptic digestion and 10% recovery during phosphopeptide enrichment, resulting in about 200 μg phosphopeptides in the end.
SCX-RPLC fractionation
An SCX-RPLC online fractionation was performed based on reference with some minor modifications. Briefly, a 4.6 mm i.d. × 12.5 mm length SCX trap column (Zorbax 300SCX, Agilent Technologies) and a 2.1 mm i.d. × 150 mm length C18 RP column (Zorbax 300Extend-C18, Agilent Technologies) were connected directly for online 2D-LC fractionation. An Agilent Infinity II HPLC system was used for the experiment. 0.1% formic acid (FA) in water, 0.1% FA in acetonitrile (ACN), and 890 mM ammonium acetate solution (pH = 2.88) were used as mobile phase A, B, C for separation, respectively. Mobile phase A and C were used for stepwise elution of peptides from the SCX column. Mobile phase A and B were used to generate a linear gradient for RPLC separation of peptides.
Roughly 200-μg phosphopeptides were dissolved in mobile phase A and then loaded onto the SCX column with mobile phase A at a flow rate of 0.3 mL/min for 20 min. The phosphopeptides retained on the SCX column were eluted stepwise by two different concentrations of ammonium acetate solution: 150 mM and 890 mM. Then, each SCX eluate was captured on the RPLC column. RPLC gradient separation was performed at a 0.3 mL/min flow rate for 70 min: 0–5 min, 2%B; 5–7 min, 2–8% B; 7–47 min, 8–40% B; 47–49 min, 40–80%; 49–59 min, 80% B; 59–60 min, 80–2% B; 60–70 min, 2%B. 42 fractions were collected (1 fraction/ min) from 6 to 48 min for each salt step elution and the fractions were named based on the elution order. From fraction 2 to fraction 41, fractions were combined by the following rule: fraction N + fraction (N+20). The fraction 1 was combined with the mixture of fraction 2 and fraction 22, and fraction 42 was combined with the mixture of fraction 21 and fraction 41. In total, there were 40 fractions (20 fractions/salt step x 2 salt steps) collected, and they were lyophilized and stored at −80 °C before use.
CZE-MS/MS
An ECE-001 CE autosampler (CMP Scientific, Brooklyn, NY) and a Q-Exactive HF mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific) were coupled with the third-generation electro-kinetically pumped sheath flow CE-MS interface (an EMASS-II CE-MS interface, CMP Scientific). A borosilicate glass capillary (1.0 mm o.d., 0.75 mm i.d.) was pulled with a Sutter P-1000 flaming/brown micropipette puller to make an electrospray emitter. The opening of the emitter was 20–40 μm.
A 95-cm long fused silica capillary (50 µm i.d., 360 µm o.d.) was used for CZE separation. The inner wall of the capillary was coated with linear polyacrylamide (LPA) based on reference. One end of the LPA coated capillary was etched with hydrofluoric acid based on reference to reduce the outer diameter to less than 100 µm. The background electrolyte (BGE) for CZE was 5% (v/v) acetic acid (AA) (pH 2.4) and the sheath buffer for electrospray was 10% (v/v) methanol and 0.2% (v/v) FA in water. The etched end of the capillary was introduced into the electrospray emitter, and the distance between the etched end and the orifice of the emitter was ~300 µm. The distance between the emitter orifice and the inlet of the mass spectrometer was ~2 mm. 2.2 kV voltage was applied for electrospray ionization.
The 40 LC fractions were redissolved in 5 µL of 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate (pH 8) for CZE-MS/MS. For sample injection, approximately 200 nL or 300 nL of each sample was injected into the capillary for analysis. Then, 30 kV voltage was applied at the injection end for 5400 seconds for CZE separation, followed by capillary flushing with the BGE for 900 seconds under a 5-psi pressure. One CZE-MS/MS run was performed for each LC fraction.
A Q-Exactive HF mass spectrometer was used in CZE-MS/MS. A data-dependent acquisition (DDA) method was employed. The mass resolution was 60,000 (at m/z 200) for both full MS scans and MS/MS scans. The automatic gain control targets were set to 3E6 and 1E5 for full MS scans and MS/MS scans, respectively. For full MS scans, the maximum injection time was 50 ms with a scan range of 300 to 1500 m/z. For MS/MS scans, the maximum injection time was set to 110 ms. Top ten most abundant ions were sequentially isolated with a 2-m/z isolation window for fragmentation with 28% normalized collision energy. The dynamic exclusion was set to 40 s. Ions with charges higher than 1 and lower than 8 were selected for fragmentation.
Data analysis
Proteome Discoverer 2.2 software (Thermo Fisher Scientific) was used for data analysis. Sequest HT was used for the database search. The human proteome database (UP000005640, 70,965 protein sequences) containing reviewed and unreviewed proteins was downloaded from UniProt (http://www.uniprot.org/). All raw files were searched against both the forward database and a decoy (reverse) database to estimate the false discovery rate (FDR).  Maximum two missed cleavage sites were allowed for peptide identification, and the peptide length was set to 6 to 144 amino acid residues. The mass tolerances of precursor and fragments were 20 ppm and 0.05 Da, respectively. Oxidation (methionine) and phosphorylation (serine, threonine and tyrosine) were set as dynamic modifications. Acetylation at the protein N-terminal was chosen as a dynamic modification. Carbamidomethylation (cysteine) was set as a static modification. The peptide ID was filtered with confidence as high, corresponding to a 1% FDR. Protein grouping was enabled, and the strict parsimony principle was applied. The phosphoRS that integrated into the workflow was used to evaluate the confidence of the phosphosite localization.  Unless specified otherwise, the numbers of protein and peptide IDs reported in this work were all from the Proteome Discoverer 2.2 software.
MaxQuant 1.5.5.1  was also used for the database search to compare phosphopeptide IDs and phosphosite motifs obtained from our CZE-MS/MS data with the literature data. The Andromeda search engine was used to search the MS/MS spectra. The same human database used in the Proteome Discoverer search was used. The peptide mass tolerances of the first search and main search were 20 and 4.5 ppm, respectively. The fragment ion mass tolerance was 20 ppm. Trypsin was selected as the protease. The variable and static modifications were the same as the Proteome Discoverer search. The minimum length of a peptide was set to 7. The FDRs were 1% for both peptide and protein IDs. For phosphopeptide identifications, the phosphosite localization probability should be better than 0.75.
An online available GRAVY calculator (http://www.qravv-calculator.de/) was used to calculate the grand average of hydropathy (GRAVY) values of peptides. Online version of SSRCalc (http://hs2.proteome.ca/SSRCalc/SSRCalcX.html) was used to calculate the hydrophobicity indexes for peptides.  Molecular weights and isoelectric points of identified peptides were calculated using the “Compute pl/Mw” tool in ExPASy (http://web.expasy.org/compute_pi/). Motif-x (http://motif-x.med.harvard.edu/motif-x.html) was used to extract motifs from the data sets, default settings were used except MS/MS was chosen as foreground format, and the human proteome was chosen as the organism.  Motif alignment was performed with WebLogo3 (http://weblogo.threeplusone.com/create.cgi).
Observed and predicted electrophoretic mobility of peptides
The data from LC fraction 8 was used for the electrophoretic mobility analysis. Only peptides having no variable modifications except for single phosphorylation were used for the analysis. Peptides’ observed electrophoretic mobility (µef observed) was determined using migration times (tM, min) - time of MS/MS acquisition of the most intense tandem spectra for each unique peptide identification. We assumed that the electroosmotic flow (EOF) at 5% (v/v) acetic acid (pH 2.4) in the BGE was very low and mapped tM into electrophoretic mobility (µef) using the equation for their experimental conditions (a 95 cm long capillary at 280 volts/cm): 
Sequence-Specific Retention Calculator (SSRCalc) CZE model reported previously was used to predict the electrophoretic mobility of peptides.  While peptide charge and mass are the main parameters in determining mobility value, we introduced corrections for several sequence-specific features affecting corrected charge value (Zc) applied for calculations:  where 3.069 and 386 are empirical coefficients applied to align modeling output with experimentally measured values; Zc – peptide charge at pH 2.4, corrected using thirteen residue and sequence specific coefficients; Mc = (0.66*M + 0.34*N*110.9), corrected mass to reflect the influence of different amino acid size; M is the molecular weight of peptides; N is the peptide length; OFFSET is a polynomial empirical function of Zc/N to correct prediction for peptides with extremely high and low mobility values.