ABSTRACT:
Discovery proteomics experiments include many options for sample preparation and mass spectrometry data acquisition, which are capable of creating datasets for quantifying thousands of proteins. To define a strategy that would produce a dataset with sufficient content while optimizing required resources, we compared 1) single sample liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS) with data dependent acquisition (DDA) to single sample LC-MS/MS with data independent acquisition (DIA) and 2) peptide fractionation with label-free quantification (LF) to isobaric labeling followed by peptide fractionation (TMT 6-plex). These strategies were applied to the same set of 4 frozen lung squamous cell carcinomas and 4 adjacent tissues, and the overall outcomes of each experiment were assessed. We identified 6,656 unique protein groups with LF, 5,535 using TMT, 3,409 proteins from single sample analysis with DIA, and 2,219 proteins from single sample analysis with DDA. Pathway analysis indicated the number of proteins per pathway was proportional to the total protein identifications from each method, suggesting limited biological bias between experiments. The results suggest the use of single sample experiments as a rapid tissue assessment tool and digestion quality control or as a technique to maximize output from limited samples and use of TMT or LF quantification as methods for larger amounts of tumor tissue with the selection being driven mainly by instrument time limitations. Data are available via ProteomeXchange with identifiers PXD004682, PXD004683, PXD004684, and PXD005733.
METHODS:
2 Materials and Methods
Clinical Samples
Samples were collected under the Moffitt’s Total Cancer Care protocol (Liberty IRB # 12.11.0023) and Moffitt’s General Banking protocol (IRB #: USF 101642), and these experiments were performed under protocol MCC #50083. De-identified clinical attributes including gender, race, ethnicity, tumor cellularity, tumor necrosis, smoking status, and TNM staging can be found in Table S1. Six of the eight clinical samples are paired sets of tumor and adjacent lung tissues from the same patients, and the unpaired samples are designated as patients 4 and 5 or “P4/5.”
Protein Extraction and Digestion
Tissue samples were homogenized with a BioPulverizer (Biospec) and resuspended in lysis buffer containing 20 mM HEPES, pH 8.0, 9 M urea, 1 mM sodium orthovanadate, 2.5 mM sodium pyrophosphate, and 1 mM β-glycerophosphate. After brief sonication, the lysate was cleared by centrifugation at 10,000×g at 15 °C for 30 minutes. The proteins were reduced with 4.5 mM DTT at 60 °C for 20 minutes followed by alkylation with 11 mM iodoacetamide at room temperature for 15 minutes in the dark. The sample was then diluted 4-fold to a final concentration of 2 M urea, 20 mM HEPES, pH 8.0, and trypsin digestion was carried out overnight at 37 °C with an enzyme/substrate ratio of 1/50.
Sep-Pak C18 Peptide Cleanup
The digested peptide solution was acidified with 20% TFA to a final TFA concentration of 1%. After incubation at room temperature for 10 minutes, the solution was cleared by centrifugation at 10,000×g at 15 °C for 15 minutes. Sep-Pak cartridges were washed with 5 ml acetonitrile followed by 3 ml and 4 ml washes with Sep-Pak solvent A (aqueous 0.1% TFA). After acidified peptides were loaded, the cartridge was washed with 1 ml, 5 ml and 6 ml of Sep-Pak solvent A. Elution was carried out 3 times using 2 ml of Sep-Pak solvent B (aqueous 40% acetonitrile with 0.1% TFA). After freezing, the peptides were lyophilized to dryness over 2 days.
For LF, an aliquot (600 µg) of total protein digest was fractionated using basic pH reversed phase HPLC, adapted from the method published by Mertins et al. For TMT, an aliquot (100 µg) of total protein digest was labeled for each reporter ion channel, combined and fractionated using basic pH reversed phase HPLC, ibid. For DIA, aliquots (500 ng) of total protein digest were injected for each sample.
bRPLC Separation
Dried peptides were reconstituted in 20 mM ammonium formate, pH 10. bRPLC separation was carried out on Dionex Ultimate3000 UPLC using a 2.1 mm ID×50 mm column (XBridge, Waters) packed with C18, 3.5 µM particle size at a 0.2 ml/min flow rate. The gradient setting was: 100% bRPLC A (aqueous 2% acetonitrile with 5 mM ammonium formate, pH 10) for 9 minutes, then the concentration of bRPLC solvent B (aqueous 90% acetonitrile with 5 mM ammonium formate, pH 10) was increased to 6% over 4 minutes, to 28.5% over 50 minutes, to 34% over 5.5 minutes, and to 60% over 13 min, and then kept constant for 8.5 minutes prior to re-equilibration at the original conditions. Twelve concatenated fractions were analyzed with LC-MS/MS for the LF and TMT experiments.
DDA LC-MS/MS Analysis of Single Samples and Fractionated Peptides for the Label-Free Approach
A nanoflow ultra high performance liquid chromatograph (RSLC, Dionex, Sunnyvale, CA) interfaced with an electrospray quadrupole-orbital ion trap mass spectrometer (QExactive Plus, Thermo, San Jose, CA) was used for tandem mass spectrometry peptide sequencing experiments. The sample was first loaded onto a pre-column (2 cm×100 µm ID packed with C18 reversed-phase resin, 5µm particle size, 100Å pore size) and washed for 8 minutes with aqueous 2% acetonitrile and 0.04% TFA. The trapped peptides were eluted onto the analytical column, (C18, 75 µm ID×50 cm, 2 µm, 100Å, Dionex, Sunnyvale, CA). The 90-minute gradient was programmed as: 95% solvent A (aqueous 2% acetonitrile + 0.1% formic acid) for 8 minutes, solvent B (aqueous 90% acetonitrile + 0.1% formic acid) from 5% to 38.5% in 60 minutes, then from 38.5% to 90% in 7 minutes, and held at 90% for 5 minutes, followed by solvent B from 90% to 5% in 1 minute and re-equilibration for 10 minutes. The flow rate on analytical column was 300 nl/min. Sixteen tandem mass spectra were collected in a data-dependent manner following each survey scan using 60 second exclusion for previously sampled peptide peaks and normalized collision energy set to 28. A standard peptide retention time calibrator mixture (PRTC, Pierce #88320) was spiked in each LC-MS/MS analysis at the level of 10 fmol of each peptide per injection to monitor instrument performance (Figure S1). Total LC-MS/MS time for the single sample DDA and DIA experiments was 2 days each. Total LC-MS/MS time for the LF experiment was 24 days. The acquisition sequences can be found in Supplementary Methods.
TMT Quality Control
After chemical labeling, LC-MS/MS analysis was performed on each TMT channel followed by Mascot/Sequest searches and the results were summarized in Scaffold. Spectral counting was used to calculate percentage of peptides labeled with TMT reagent. In addition, MaxQuant analysis was also performed on each TMT channel to verify correct TMT channel was labeled for each sample and to examine the crosstalk between channels. The TMT experimental design can be found in Supplementary Methods.
LC-MS/MS Analysis of TMT Samples
The same UPLC and mass spectrometry instrument parameters were used as described above except in MS2 where the first mass was set to m/z 100 to include the reporter ions and the normalized collision energy value was set to 30. Twenty-five femtomoles of PRTC was spiked in each LC-MS/MS analysis to monitor instrument performance (Figure S1). Total LC-MS/MS time was 6 days. The acquisition sequence can be found in Supplementary Methods.
DIA Analysis of Label-Free Unfractionated Samples
The same UPLC conditions were used as described above for the DDA experiments. The mass spectrometry method utilized MS1 scans alternated with looped 18 narrow window DIA scans covering m/z range from 450 to 1,080. The MS/MS isolation windows from 450 to 900 were set at 5 Th and the isolation windows from 900 to 1,080 were set at 8 Th. Resolution was set at 70,000 for MS1 and 17,500 for MS/MS. Twenty-five femtomoles of PRTC peptide mix was spiked in each LC-MS/MS analysis to monitor instrument performance (Figure S1). The acquisition sequence can be found in Supplementary Methods.
MaxQuant Data Analysis
MaxQuant (version 1.5.2.8) was used for the peptide and protein identification from LF and TMT results. Database searches were conducted against human entries in UniProt (downloaded 05/25/2015). The “align across runs” option was selected with a mass error of 10 ppm and a retention time window of 4 minutes. We set less stringent preliminary false discovery rate (FDR) thresholds in order to assess content that would otherwise be missed. For LF, the false discovery rate (FDR) thresholds for peptides and proteins were set to 0.05% and 0.2%, respectively. For TMT, the FDR threshold for peptides was 0.05% and 0.1% for proteins. Concordance of LF and single sample DDA technical replicates were measured using Pearson’s correlation of log2-transformed intensities (Figures S2 and S3, respectively). For TMT, we found that MaxQuant automatically combined the technical replicates, so we examined the correlation of the MS data between experimental replicates (Figure S4). Peptide and protein group intensities were extracted from MaxQuant output and input into R/RStudio with corresponding metadata. We filtered the data using a posterior error probability (PEP) cutoff of 0.05. PEP can be used as a data quality filter similar to FDR. Reverse-only sequences, non-human peptides, and peptides that were identified but had no corresponding intensities were also filtered out. Intensity values for peptides and protein groups that passed filtering were then log2-transformed for subsequent analyses. Missing values were replaced with NA so that they were excluded from plots and calculations in the R environment. The differential expression threshold was defined as 1.5 times the standard deviation (SD) of the average log2 ratio of tumor and adjacent protein group intensities. Summarized results can be found in Table S2.
IDPicker Data Analysis
MSConvert was first used to convert Thermo .RAW data files into mzML and mzXML formats. DIA-Umpire (http://www.nesvilab.org/software.html) was used to create 3 pseudo-tandem MS spectra from each mzXML data file. DIA pseudo-spectra and DDA spectra were then searched with MS-GF+ against the UniProt database (Sep 2015 release). Search parameters included a 15 ppm mass tolerance; carbamidomethylation (cysteine), oxidation (methionine), and pyroglutamic acid (glutamic acid) as allowable modifications; and no limitation on missed cleavages. IDPicker version 3 was used to create a final protein assembly from the DDA and DIA experiments. A maximum of 1% FDR for peptide spectrum matches were allowed with a minimum of one spectrum per peptide and one peptide per protein. The final assembly had a spectrum FDR of 0.27%, a peptide FDR of 1.27%, and protein FDR 6.84%. Summarized results can be found in Table S3.
Pinnacle Data Analysis
Label free files were searched against human entries in UniProt (as above) using both Sequest and Mascot in Protein Discoverer (v. 1.4 with Percolator). Two missed tryptic cleavages were allowed, precursor mass tolerance was set to 10 ppm, MS/MS mass tolerance was 0.05 Da, and dynamic modifications included cysteine carbamidomethylation and methionine oxidation. The search result files were loaded into Pinnacle version 1.0.26.0 (OPTYS Tech Corporation), and the spectral library threshold settings included a Percolator q-value less than 0.05, Sequest XCorr scores above 1.5/2.0/2.2 for singly/doubly/triply protonated peptides, or a Mascot Ion score > 29. Pinnacle was then used for the peptide and protein identification from the DIA results with cutoff values for CV within the group (50%) and missing values (< 20% across the dataset). Concordance of technical replicates was measured using Pearson’s correlation of log2-transformed peptide peak areas (Figure S5). Pinnacle-assigned peptides from the spectral library that were not observed with sufficient confidence in the LF data (the source of the spectral library) were removed as along with their corresponding proteins. Pinnacle proteins with less than a quality score of 3 were also removed (full Pinnacle scoring can be found in Table S2). Peak areas were then log2-transformed for subsequent analyses. Missing values were replaced with NA, so that they were excluded from plots and calculations in the R environment. The differential expression threshold was defined as 1.5 times the SD of the average log2 ratio of tumor and adjacent lung tissue protein peak areas.
SCC Marker Identification
In a previous publication, we analyzed two publically available SCC datasets and compared the findings with our own experiment. We took the list of SCC markers from these three datasets and examined their expression levels in these LF, TMT, and DIA datasets. We defined a marker as having at least 1.5 times higher expression in SCC compared to lung adenocarcinoma and a p-value of less than 0.05 from a Welch two-sample t-test of the relative protein expression levels (Table S4).
Data Availability
The mass spectrometry proteomics data have been deposited to the ProteomeXchange Consortium via the PRIDE partner repository with the dataset identifiers PXD004682, PXD004683, PXD004684, and PXD005733.