ABSTRACT:
The gold standard vascular substitutes, used in cardiovascular surgery, are the Dacron or expanded polytetrafluoroethylene (ePTFE)-derived grafts. However, major adverse reactions accompany their use. For this purpose, decellularized human umbilical arteries (hUAs) may be proven as a significant source for the development of small diameter conduits. The aim of this study was the evaluation of a decellularization protocol in hUAs. To study the effect of the decellularization to the hUAs, histological analysis was performed. Then, native and decellularized hUAs were biochemically and biomechanically evaluated. Finally, broad proteomic analysis was applied. Histological analysis revealed the successful decellularization of the hUAs. Furthermore, a great amount of DNA was removed from the decellularized hUAs. Biomechanical analysis revealed statistically significant differences in longitudinal direction only in maximum stress (p < 0.013) and strain (p < 0.001). On the contrary, all parameters tested for circumferential direction exhibited significant differences (p < 0.05). Proteomic analysis showed the preservation of the extracellular matrix and cytoskeletal proteins in both groups. Proteomic data are available via ProteomeXchange with identifier PXD020187. The above results indicated that hUAs were efficiently decellularized. The tissue function properties of these conduits were well retained, making them ideal candidates for the development of small diameter vascular grafts.
METHODS:
2. Experimental Section
2.1. Isolation of hUAs from Delivered hUCs
HUAs were isolated from hUCs (n = 10), that were delivered to the Hellenic Cord Blood Bank (HCBB). HUCs were obtained from end term gestations (38–40 weeks), either with normal or caesarian delivery. Each hUC was accompanied by a signed informed consent by the mother before the gestation. The informed consent was in accordance with the Helsinki declaration and fulfilled the ethical standards of the Greek National Ethical Committee. The overall study has been approved by the Bioethics Committee of BRFAA (No. 7580, 11 October 2018). In this study, only hUCs with gestational days above 38 weeks, were used. The hUCs were delivered to HCBB sooner (less than 36 h) after the gestation and the overall storage time until processing did not exceed 24 h. 
Before the isolation of hUAs, the hUCs were washed with a phosphate buffer saline 1× (PBS 1×, Gibco, Life Technologies, Grand Island, NY, USA), to remove excess blood and blood clots. Then, sterilized forceps and scissors were used for the removal of human umbilical vein, and Wharton’s jelly tissue and finally for the isolation of hUAs. The intact hUAs (n = 10, l = 5 cm) were used for the next series of experiments. HUAs with entrapped clots in the vessel lumen were excluded, due to possible damage of the vascular wall. Then, each hUA was cut into two parts of equal length. One part served as a native hUA, whereas the other (of the same hUA) was submitted to decellularization. Moreover, the infant’s gender, weight, and gestation days were also recorded in this study. 
2.2. Decellularization of hUAs 
HUAs (n = 10, length = 2 cm) upon isolation from hUCs, were submitted to decellularization according to a previous described protocol from our lab with some modifications. Initially, the hUAs were incubated in a decellularization buffer 1 (DB1), which consisted of 8 mM CHAPS, 1 M NaCl, and 25 mM EDTA in PBS 1× (Gibco, Life Technologies, Grand Island, NY, USA), for 12 h (h) at room temperature (RT). Briefly washing of hUAs for the removal of the excess of DB1 with PBS 1×, was performed. Then, the hUAs were placed in DB2, consisting of 1.8 mM SDS, 1 M NaCl, and 25 mM EDTA in PBS 1× (Gibco, Life Technologies, Grand Island, NY, USA) for another 12 h at RT, followed by briefly washing with PBS 1× (Gibco). Finally, the hUAs were incubated at 37 °C for 12 h in a α-Minimum Essentials Medium (α-ΜΕΜ, Gibco, Life Technologies, Grand Island, NY, USA) with 40% v/v Fetal Bovine Serum (FBS, Gibco, Life Technologies, Grand Island, NY, USA), ensuring the complete removal of genetic material remnants. All incubation steps were performed under continuous agitation.
2.3. Histological Analysis
Histological analysis of hUAs was performed for the evaluation of the decellularization process. Native (n = 10) and decellularized (n = 10) hUAs, were fixed overnight with 10% v/v neutral buffered formalin (Sigma-Aldrich, Merck, Darmstadt, Germany), dehydrated, paraffin embedded, and sectioned at 5 μm. For the histological analysis, Hematoxylin and Eosin (H&E, Sigma-Aldrich), Sirius Red (SR, pH = 2, Sigma-Aldrich, Merck, Darmstadt, Germany), and Orcein (OS, Sigma-Aldrich, Merck, Darmstadt, Germany) stains were performed for the evaluation of cellular and nuclear materials, collagen and elastin, respectively. Images were acquired with a Leica DM L2 light microscope (Leica microsystems, Weltzar, Germany) and processed with Image J v. 1.46r (Wane Rasband, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD, USA).
2.4. Immunofluorescence of hUAs
Further histological analysis, the indirect immunofluorescence of hUAs against collagen I and fibronectin were involved. Slides of native and decellulized hUAs were deparaffinized, rehydrated, and blocked. The sections were incubated with monoclonal antibodies against collagen I (1:2000, Sigma-Aldrich) and fibronectin (1:200, Sigma-Aldrich, Merck, Darmstadt, Germany), followed by incubation with FITC-conjugated mouse IgG (1:80). In addition, the DAPI stain (Sigma-Aldrich, Merck, Darmstadt, Germany), was added to all samples. Finally, the sections were dehydrated and glycerol mounted. Images were acquired with a Leica SP5 II coupled with LAS Suite v. 2 software (Leica microsystems, Weltzar, Germany).
2.5. Scanning Electron Microscopy
Scanning electron microscopy (SEM) analysis was also performed in native (n = 3, l = 0.5 cm) and decellularized (n = 3, l = 0.5 cm) hUAs. Segments of native and decellularized hUAs were fixed with a 1% v/v glutaraldehyde solution (Sigma-Aldrich) for 30 min, followed by briefly washing with distilled water. Then, the samples were dehydrated in 70, 80, and 95% v/v aqueous ethanol and absolute ethanol with 20 min exchanges. The segments of hUAs were incubated for 10 min with hexamethyldisilazane (HMDS, Sigma-Aldrich, Merck, Darmstadt, Germany) and sputter coated with gold (Cressington Sputter, Coater 108 auto, Watford, United Kingdom). Finally, the samples were examined with a Phillips XL-30 SEM (Phillips, FEI, Hillsboro, OR, USA).
2.6. Biochemical Analysis of hUAs
Collagen, sGAGs, and DNA quantification was performed in native (n = 10, l = 1 cm) and decellularized (n = 10, l = 1 cm) hUAs. 
Specifically, the collagen content was estimated based on the quantification of hydroxyproline. For this purpose, the Hydroxyproline Assay kit (MAK008, Sigma-Aldrich, Merck, Darmstadt, Germany) was applied, according to the manufacturer’s instructions. For sGAG quantification, all samples were initially digested with a papain buffer (125 μg/mL, Sigma-Aldrich, Merck, Darmstadt, Germany) at 60 °C for no more than 12 h. Then, dimethylene blue (DMB, Sigma-Aldrich, Merck, Darmstadt, Germany) was added to the digests, followed by a photometrically measurement at 525 nm. The estimation of sGAG concentration in each sample was performed through interpolation to a standard curve. Chondroitin sulfate in a concentration of 12, 25, 50, 100, and 150 μg/mL was used as a standard for the development of the standard curve.
The DNA content was quantified in native (n = 10, l = 1 cm) and decellularized (n = 10, l = 1 cm) hUAs samples. Briefly, the samples were digested in a lysis buffer (0.1 mol Tris, 0.2 mol NaCl, 5 mmol NaCl, and 25 mg/mL Proteinase K, Sigma-Aldrich, Merck, Darmstadt, Germany). The incubation time was 12 h at 55 °C with mild agitation, followed by inactivation of Proteinase K at 65 °C for 5 min. The DNA was ethanol cleaned and photometrically measured with Nanodrop (Thermo Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA) at 260 to 280 nm.
2.7. Specimen Preparation for Biomechanical Analysis and Geometrical Evaluation
A ring-like (~1-mm width) and a strip-like sample (~5-mm long) were kept for qualitative histological observations. The left-over arterial segment was kept for biomechanical studies, during which it was stored in a Krebs-Ringer solution at 4 °C and slowly warmed to 37 °C before testing. At that time, the vessel was cut into a ring and a strip sample along the circumferential and longitudinal direction, respectively. These were placed inside a Petri dish containing a Krebs-Ringer solution at 37 °C, and their frontal and lateral aspects were photographed with a color digital camera (Leica DFC500; Leica Microsystems GmbH, Wetzlar, Germany) coupled to a stereomicroscope (Nikon SMZ800; Nikon Instruments Europe BV, Amsterdam, The Netherlands). The inner and outer circumference, thickness, cross-sectional area, and width of the ring sample, as well as the length, thickness, and width of the strip sample were measured from the pictures in their unloaded state with the Image-Pro Plus software (v. 4.5, Media Cybernetics Inc, Bethesda, MD, USA). Thickness and width measurements were automatically conducted at a hundred equidistant locations along the circumference of rings and the length of strips, and then by taking the average. 
2.8. Uniaxial Tension: Setup and Methods
The experimental device (Vitrodyne V1000 Universal Tester; Liveco Inc, Burlington, VT, USA) consisted of (a) a stationary lower grip and an upper grip attached to the actuator, gradually extending the samples that were vertically mounted in the grips; (b) a load cell (GSO-250; Transducer Techniques, Temecula, CA, USA) with 0.01-g accuracy for the evaluation of load; (c) a rotary encoder providing feedback on the vertical displacement of the upper sample grip with 10-μm accuracy; (d) a saline bath wherein the samples were submerged during testing to sustain normal tissue hydration; (e) a heater coil (1130A, PolyScience, Niles, IL, USA) regulating the temperature of the saline bath at 37 °C; and (f) an accompanying personal computer, interfaced with the controller of the device via the Material Witness software package (v. 2.02, Liveco Inc, Burlington, VT, USA), to store the data. Hook-shaped grips were used for mounting the ring samples and parallel plate grips for the strip samples. Small pieces of non-slip paper were attached to the inner surfaces of the parallel plate grips, thereby providing sufficient friction to avoid sample slippage. The unloaded length of the samples was obtained by adjusting vertically the upper grip to record only their weight and certified by the absence of sample folding. The samples were submitted to a progressively increasing tensile load at a 10-μm/s rate until full rupture of the wall, as in previous studies from our group. Unlike the rings, the majority of strips exhibited multiple ruptures. Only data up to the first rupture were evaluated and presented. Synchronized output from the load cell and the rotary encoder was transmitted to the accompanying computer with a 50-Hz sampling frequency. Tissue properties in both directions were examined to determine direction-dependent differences.
2.9. Biomechanical Data Processing
Stretch was calculated as the ratio of sample length at each load to the unloaded length and strain as stretch minus one. Stress was calculated by dividing the product of the load and stretch by their unloaded cross-sectional area, assuming tissue incompressibility. The stress-strain data were regressed with 9th-order polynomials, affording correlation coefficients r > 0.95, and the elastic modulus (tangent) at each strain level was calculated as the first derivative of stress over strain. Failure stress, representing tissue strength, and failure strain, representing extensibility, were calculated as the maximum stress and strain values at the first rupture. Peak elastic modulus, representing maximum tissue stiffness, was calculated as the highest elastic modulus value before the first rupture. All calculations were semi-automatically performed using a routine programmed in Mathematica (v. 9.0, Wolfram Research Inc, Boston, MA, USA). 
2.10. HUAs Preparation for Proteomic Analysis
Native (n = 5) and decellularized (n = 5) hUAs were digested with a sample buffer (7 M urea, 2 M thiourea, 4% CHAPS, 1% DTE, and 3.6% Protease inhibitors. Sigma-Aldrich, Merck, Darmstadt, Germany). The Bradford assay was performed for the determination of samples concentration. A sample reduction with 10 mM DTE for 20 min at room temperature (RT), was performed. The next step involved the addition of the buffer exchange to the samples, followed by centrifugation at 16,000 g for 15 min. This step was performed in Amicon Ultra Centrifugal filter devices (0.5 mL, 30 kDa MWCO; Merck Millipore). The addition of an urea buffer (8 M urea in 0.1 M Tris-HCl pH 8.5, Merck, Darmstadt, Germany) in all samples was followed. Protein alkylation was performed with 0.05 M iodoacetamide in an urea buffer for 20 min at RT. Briefly washing with an urea buffer (two times) and an ammonium bicarbonate buffer (50 mM NH4HCO3 pH 8.5, Sigma-Aldrich, Darmstadt, Germany) in all samples was performed. Finally, trypsinization of proteins (trypsin ratio 1:100, Sigma-Aldrich, Darmstadt, Germany), centrifugation at 16,000 g for 10 min, and lyophilization were performed.
2.11. LC-MS/MS of hUAS
The proteomic analysis of all samples was performed using LC/MS on the Dionex Ultimate 3000 UHPLC system coupled with the high resolution nano-ESI Orbitrap-Elite mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific). A loading solution of 0.1% v/v formic acid (Sigma-Aldrich, Darmstadt, Germany) was used for the reconstitution of the samples. The samples were loaded on the Acclaim PepMap 100, 100 μm × 2 cm C18, 5 μm, 100 Ȧ trapping column with the ulPickUp Injection mode with the loading pump operating at a flow rate of 5 μL/min. In order for the peptides of the samples to be separated the Acclaim PepMap RSLC, 75 μm × 50 cm, nanoViper, C18, 2 μm, 100 Ȧ column retrofitted to a PicoTip emitter was used. The mobile phases A and B were composed of 0.1% formic acid (Sigma-Aldrich, Darmstadt, Germany) and 100% acetonitrile (Sigma-Aldrich, Darmstadt, Germany), 0.1% formic acid (Sigma-Aldrich, Darmstadt, Germany), respectively. Then, the elution of peptides for 240 min from 2% to 33% was performed. The flow rate and the temperature of the column were 300 nl/min and 35 °C, respectively. Positive ion electrospray ionization was applied in order to achieve the gaseous exchange transition of the peptides. Top 10 precursor ions between m/z ratio 300 and 2200, intensity threshold 500 counts, and FT mass resolution of 60,000, were subjected in a higher-energy collisional dissociation (HCD) fragmentation. Tandem mass spectra were finally acquired. Normalized collision energy was set to 33 and the precursor ions were excluded for final activation (45 s, 5 ppm mass tolerance).
2.12. Protein Identification
Proteome Discoverer 1.4 (Thermo Finnigan) coupled with the Sequest search engine and Uniprot database (Homo sapiens) was used for the analysis of the raw files. Peptide identification was performed taking into consideration the following parameters. (1) Carbamidomethylation of cysteine and oxidation of methionine as static and dynamic modifications. (2) Two missed cleavage sites, a precursor mass tolerance of 10 ppm, and fragment mass tolerance of 0.05 Da were allowed. In addition, the q-value (target False Discovery rate FDR-strict: 0.01, target FDR-relaxed: 0.05) was applied for the FDR validation.
The mass spectrometry proteomics data have been deposited to the ProteomeXchange Consortium via the PRIDE partner repository with the dataset identifier PXD020187 (Appendix A). The classification of the identified proteins was performed using the Panther classification system (). Furthermore, key specific protein associations were obtained, using the STRING v11 protein database. The proteins COL3A1 (P12111), COL1A2 (P12110), and FN1 (PO2751) were subjected to the STRING v11 database to map the canonical pathways and protein networks.
2.13. Statistical Analysis
Microcal Origin (v. 9.0; OriginLab® Corp., Northampton, MA, USA) was used for the statistical analysis of the current study. Collagen, sGAG, and DNA quantification data were compared using the Mann-Whitney test. Statistical significance was considered when the p-value was less than 0.05. Indicated values were the mean ± standard deviation. The unpaired Student’s t-test was used for comparisons of the biomechanical parameters between decellularized and native arteries, while comparisons between directions were assessed with the paired t-test. The Pearson correlation coefficient r was used for identifying associations of the biomechanical parameters with gestational age, infant’s weight, and arterial caliber, i.e., wall thickness and diameter. The effect of infant’s gender on the biomechanical properties was assessed with the unpaired t-test. 