ABSTRACT:
Translational control plays a central role in regulation of gene expression and can lead to significant divergence between mRNA- and protein-abundance. Here, we used genome-wide approaches combined with time-course analysis to measure the mRNA-abundance, mRNA-translation rate and protein expression during the transition of naïve-to-primed mouse embryonic stem cells (ESCs). We find that the ground state ESCs cultured with GSK3-, MEK-inhibitors and LIF (2iL) display higher ribosome density on a selective set of mRNAs. This set of mRNAs undergo strong translational buffering to maintain stable protein expression levels in 2iL-ESCs. Importantly, we show that the global alteration of cellular proteome during the transition of naïve-to-primed pluripotency is largely accompanied by transcriptional rewiring. Thus, we provide a comprehensive and detailed overview of the global changes in gene expression in different states of ESCs and dissect the relative contributions of mRNA-transcription, translation and regulation of protein stability in controlling protein abundance.
Translational control of gene expression can lead to significant divergence between mRNA and protein abundance. Here, the authors describe transcriptional rewiring and translational buffering during transition from naïve to primed pluripotency through quantitation of mRNA-abundance, translation rate and protein expression.
METHODS:
Methods
ESC culture
For SL culture, E14Tg2a ESCs (purchased from ATCC) were maintained on gelatin-coated dishes without feeder cells and in Dulbecco’s modified Eagle’s medium (DMEM) supplemented with 10% fetal calf serum, l-glutamine (2 nM), Na-Pyruvate (1 mM), non-essential amino acids (0.1 mM each), penicillin/streptomycin (Gibco), 2-mercaptoethanol (55 µM), and LIF (1000 U/ml, Milipore). For 2iL culture, E14Tg2a ESCs were cultured in NDiff 227 medium (StemCells, Inc.) supplemented with MEK inhibitor PD0325901 (1 μM), GSK3 inhibitor CHIR99021 (3 μM), and LIF (1000 U/ml, Milipore). SL-ESCs were cultured for over 2 months (>24 passages) in 2iL medium to generate the steady-state 2iL ESCs. For EPI differentiation, E14Tg2a ESCs were cultured in NDiff 227 (StemCells, Inc.) supplemented with penicillin/streptomycin, 20 ng/ml Activin-A (R&D Systems), 12 ng/ml bFGF (R&D Systems), and 1% knock-out serum replacement (Gibco) and on Fibronectin (10 μg/ml)-coated dishes at ~15,000 cells per cm2 density. For EPI differentiation, 2iL-ESCs were transferred to EPI medium and were maintained for 72 h. For single-inhibitor experiments and to assess the (likely) direct effects of PD and CHIRON signaling, we cultured the steady-state 2iL ESCs for 1 and 3 days in single inhibitor-supplemented medium and collected the cells for further experiments.
Polysome profiling assay
Cells were pretreated with 100 µg/ml cycloheximide (Sigma) for 5 min, and lysed in hypotonic buffer (5 mM Tris-HCl (pH 7.5), 2.5 mM MgCl2, 1.5 mM KCl, 1× protease inhibitor cocktail (EDTA-free; Roche), 100 µg/ml cycloheximide, 2 mM DTT, 200 U/ml RNaseIn, 0.5% (v/w) Triton X-100, and 0.5% (v/w) sodium deoxycholate) to isolate the ribonucleoproteins. Four hundred micrograms of the ribonucleoproteins were separated on a 10–50% sucrose gradient by ultracentrifugation at 36,000 r.p.m. in an SW40 rotor (Beckman Coulter) at 4 °C for 2 h, and fractionated using an ISCO gradient fractionation system and optical density at 254 nm was continuously recorded with a FOXO JR Fractionator (Teledyne ISCO).
Ribosome profiling assay
Ribosome profiling was performed as previously described, with minor modifications. Briefly, 500 µg of the ribonucleoproteins (two biological replicates per sample) were treated with 1000 U RNase I (Ambion Cat# AM2295) at 4 °C for 50 min with gentle end-over-end rotation followed by incubation with SuperaseIn (Ambion, Cat# AM2696). Monosomes were pelleted by ultracentrifugation in a 34% sucrose cushion at 70,000 r.p.m. in a TLA-120.2 rotor (Beckman Coulter) at 4 °C for 3 h. RNA fragments were extracted with acid phenol (2×), once with chloroform, and precipitated with isopropanol at −20 °C in the presence of NaOAc and GlycoBlue (Invitrogen). Purified RNA samples were resolved on a denaturing 15% polyacrylamide-urea gel and the sections corresponding to 28–32 nucleotides containing the RFPs were excised, eluted, and precipitated by isopropanol.
Purified RFPs were dephosphorylated using T4 polynucleotide kinase (New England Biolabs) for 1 h at 37 °C. Denatured fragments were re-suspended in 10 mM Tris (pH 7) and quantified using the Bio-Analyzer Small RNA assay (Agilent). A sample of 10 pmol of RNA was ligated to the 3′-adaptor with T4 RNA ligase 1 (New England Biolabs) for 2 h at 37 °C. Reverse transcription was carried out using oNTI223 adapter (Illumina) and SuperScript III reverse transcriptase (Invitrogen) according to the manufacturer’s instructions. Products were separated from the empty adaptor on a 10% polyacrylamide Tris/Borate/EDTA-urea (TBE-urea) gel and circularized by CircLigase (Epicentre). Ribosomal RNA amounts were reduced by subtractive hybridization using biotinylated rDNA complementary oligos. The RFP libraries were amplified by PCR (11 cycles) using indexed primers and quantified using the Agilent BioAnalyzer High-Sensitivity assay. DNA was then sequenced on the HiSeq-2000 platform with read length of 50 nucleotides (SR50) according to the manufacturer’s instructions, with sequencing primer oNTI202 (5CGACAGGTTCAGAGTTCTACAGTCCGACGATC).
RNA-seq assay
RNA isolation was performed using two biological samples per time point and the Qiagen RNeasy protocol. Four micrograms of RNA was employed to generate the RNA-seq libraries. In short, total RNA was subjected to rRNA depletion using the Ribo-ZeroTM Gold kit (Epicentre) according to the manufacturer's instructions. rRNA-depleted samples were employed for first- and second-strand cDNA synthesis and using dUTP for strand-specificity. RNA-seq libraries were prepared using KAPA Hyperprep kit (Roche 07962363001) according to the manufacturer's instructions and the final libraries were sequenced on a HiSeq-2000 Illumina sequencer.
Analysis of ribosome profiling and RNA-seq data
To analyze the ribosome profiling data, FASTQ reads were processed as previously described. Briefly, adaptor sequences were removed using fastx_clipper (fastx_toolkit-0.0.14) (http://hannonlab.cshl.edu/fastx_toolkit/index.html) and by employing the following parameters clipper -Q33 -a CTGTAGGCACCATCAAT -l 25 -c -n -v. Reads were then trimmed using fastx_trimmer (fastx_toolkit-0.0.14) and -Q33 -f 2 parameters. Both RNA-seq reads and the trimmed RFP reads were then aligned against mouse rRNA, tRNA, snRNA, snoRNA, mtRNA sequences using Bowtie and -seedlen=23 to deplete these small RNA contamination. Unmapped reads (cleaned) were then mapped against mouse genome (mm9) using GSNAP and by employing the following parameters: -B 5 -t 15 -N 1 -E 100 -w 100000 -n 10 -s mm9refGene_splice. Mapped reads were counted in the coding sequence using HTseq-count with the settings: -m union -s reverse -t CDS.
RFP and RNA-Seq read counts were normalized for quantification of the TE quantification and differentially translation analysis using Xtail algorithm v.1.1.5 (ref. ) with minMeanCount=50. Genes were considered differentially translated if they had at least 50 normalized reads in RNA, 25 normalized reads in RFP, displayed absolute fold change >1.5 and FDR ≤ 0.1. The DESeq package was also used to normalize the RFP and RNA-Seq read counts (with similar results to Xtail normalization) and the results were employed to correlate the variation in RNA, RFP, and protein levels. Graphs were generated using data.table and ggplot2 R packages in R version 3.5.1 on Ubuntu 16.04.5 LTS.
Quality control of Ribo-Seq data
To analyze the position of initiating ribosome in relation to the annotated translation initiation sites (TISs), we employed a custom pipeline as reported previously. Briefly, BAM files were converted to strand specific 5′ end wiggle files using a custom Pyton script. Wiggle files were then converted to a format suitable for the Batch PositionConverter Interface in Mutalyzer 2.0.beta-32 (https://mutalyzer.nl/batchPositionConverter). These converted files were then manually loaded into Mutalyzer to retrieve positions relative to the annotated TIS. We analyzed the first position of the aligned reads to transcript coordinates and relating those coordinates to annotated TISs positions located up to −15 nt surrounding the TIS were counted as positions in coding regions For all samples, a major peak was observed at −12 nt from the annotated TIS.
To calculate the read distribution and coverage at 5′ UTR, CDS, and 3′ UTR regions, we first downloaded all the 5′ UTR, CDS, and 3′ UTR sequences from Ensemble BIOMART mm9 database. CDS sequences were extended by 50 nt upstream for 5′ UTR analysis and by 200 nt downstream for 3′ UTR analysis. We used CDS sequences with more than 1000 nt for this analysis. The generated BED file for 5′ UTR-CDS or 3′ UTR-CDS were binned into 10 nt bins and the number of reads from RNA-seq and RFP-seq libraries were counted using BEDtools, Samtools and in house script (peakstats.py).
Proteome profiling with LC-MS/MS
To generate whole-cell proteomics profiles, cells were lyzed in 4% SDS, 0.1 M HEPES pH 7.6, 0.1 M DTT. Protein lysates were then digested with trypsin/LysC combination using Filter Aided Sample‐Preparation (FASP) as described previously. Peptides were desalted and purified on StageTips and were loaded on Orbitrap LC-MS (Thermo). Two set of proteomes were generated: the forward proteome (included 2iL, SLd1, SLd3, SLd7, SL, and EPI samples) and the reverse transition (that included SL, 2iLd1, 2iLd3, 2iLd7, and 2iL samples). MaxQuant 1.5.1.0 (ref. ) was used to analyze the mass spectra. Briefly Thermo Raw MS files were used to search against the curated mouse RefSeq protein sequence database using default MaxQuant settings with match-between-runs, and label-free quantification (LFQ) and iBAQ quantification of proteins enabled. One percent false-discovery rate was applied to the match of propensity-score matching and assembly of proteins. Two missed cleavages were allowed for trypsin enzyme cuts and peptides length was set between 1 and 7 amino acids. Perseus software (version 1.5.5.3) was used to perform filtering, imputation of missing values, and permutation-based t-test. In brief, the generated LFQ and IBAQ values from MaxQuant were used and the identified proteins were searched against a decoy database from MaxQuant. We filtered out proteins that flagged as “reverse” or “contaminant” from the final list. To calculate differential protein expression, biological triplicates were grouped and the protein list was filtered for proteins that were not reproducibly quantified in three replicates in at least one conditions of the forward or reverse proteome samples. Next, missing values were imputed from a normal distribution using the default settings (width = 0.3, down shift = 1.8). Lastly, differential proteins between triplicates were calculated using a Student’s t-test (FDR < 0.05) and a fold-change of >3-fold, following previous recommendations.
qRT-PCR
To validate the candidate genes expression in polysome profiling assay, sucrose gradient fractions were used for RNA extraction by using TRIzol (ThermoFisher). RNA samples were employed in cDNA synthesis using 1 µg of RNA according to the manufacturer's instructions. Fractions collected from two independent experiments were used. Quantitative PCR was performed using iQ SYBR green supermix (Bio-Rad) and primers in Supplementary Data 6. Ct values were normalized to input samples from un-fractionated (total) lysates.
Western blot analysis
ES cells were lysed in RIPA buffer supplemented with protease inhibitors (11836170001; Roche). Twelve percent SDS-PAGE gels were used for protein separation followed by transfer onto PVDF membrane. Blots were blocked with 5% non-fat milk at room temperature for 1 h and incubated with the following primary antibodies overnight at 4 °C: RNF126 (Abcam, ab234812, 1:500), BHMT (Abcam, ab96415, 1:500), NQO1 (Abcam, ab28947, 1:500), KRAS (Abcam, Ab180772, 1:500), S100A6 (Abcam, ab134149, 1:1000), OCT4 (Millipore, MABD76, 1:1000), and ESRRB (Perseus proteomics, PP-H6705-00, 1:1000). Primary antibodies for GAPDH (Abcam, Ab8245, 1:1000) and ACTB (Sigma, A1978, 1:1000) were employed as internal controls and for 1 h at room temperature. HRP-swine-anti-rabbit (Dako, P0217) and HRP-rabbit anti mouse (Dako, P0161) were used as secondary antibodies and subsequently signal was detected using ECL kit (Pierce, 32106) and the ImageQuant LAS 4000 system (GE Healthcare Life Sciences). Western blots were repeated for two times.
Comparison with embryonic profiles
We first compared the profiles of 2iL, SL, and EPI ESCs and selected genes that are specific for each state or shared between SL and EPI when compared to 2iL state (FC ≥ 3 and DEseq, adjusted P value <0.05). We then performed hypergeometric enrichment analysis and computed the enrichment of ESCs-specific genes within stage-specific gene sets previously reported for different stages of the developing mouse embryo. All P values were corrected using Benjamini–Hochberg test.
UTR analysis
We retrieved the 5′-UTR, CDS and 3′-UTR sequences from Ensemble BIOMART and used the full-length sequences for structural features analysis (including nucleotide composition, sequence enrichment, and motif enrichment analysis). To analyze the sequence around the start and stop codons, we selected the 50 nt flanking the start site and the 200 nt flanking the stop codon. To compute the length and the %GC of different sequences the bedtools nuc from BEDTools suite v2.20.1 was used. To compute the AU-rich elements (ARE) enrichment, we scanned for the UAUUUAU elements in the 3′ UTR regions of differentially translated mRNAs (n = 108), all mRNAs that were included in TE-analysis (n = ~6300) and randomly selected 3′ UTR regions (n = 108) using Gimme scan and the following parameters: -c 0.9 –r. AREs were scanned in the positive strand of 3′ UTRs and mRNAs with at least one ARE in their 3′ UTR region were counted. Hypergeometric test was performed to compute the enrichment of AREs in differentially translated genes and random set of genes.
RBP motif analysis
We used the CISBP-RNA database that includes RNA motifs for 228 RNA-binding proteins. Gimme Motifs package scan was then used with –c 0.9 –r to scan all motifs for the known RNA-binding proteins in the 3′ UTR of differentially translated genes, total genes (6K), and 108 randomly selected genes. We captured ~186 unique RBP motifs in DE genes, all genes, and in random list. Hypergeometric test was then performed to calculate the enrichment for different RBP-motifs for the differentially translated mRNAs and the random set of genes.
Protein complex enrichment analysis GO-term analysis
To compute the enrichment of different protein complexes in the list of differentially expressed proteins, we used the recently annotated compendium of 275 large protein complexes (>5 members). Hypergeometric test was used to calculate the enrichment and P values were adjusted for multiple testing using Benjamini–Hochberg correction and protein complexes with FDR ≤ 0.1 were selected.
Statistics and reproducibility
R version 3.5.1 on Ubuntu 16.04.5 LTS was used for statistical analyses. Error bars, P values, and statistical tests are reported in the figure legends. Biovenn was used to generate the venn diagram for overlap between RNA, RFP, and proteins. http://www.biovenn.nl/. Statistical tests include paired or unpaired two-tailed Student’s t-test, Fisher’s exact test, Wilcoxon rank-sum test, “N–1” Chi-squared test, Pearson correlation, and Wald test. All experiments were performed independently at least two times unless otherwise indicated.
Reporting summary
Further information on research design is available in the Nature Research Reporting Summary linked to this article.