ABSTRACT:
In order to successfully enter the latent stage, Mycobacterium tuberculosis must adapt to conditions such as nutrient limitation and hypoxia. In vitro models that mimic latent infection are valuable tools for describing the changes in metabolism that occur when the bacterium exists in a non-growing form. We used two complementary proteomic approaches, label-free LC-MS/MS analysis and two-dimensional difference gel electrophoresis, to determine the proteome profile of extracellular proteins from M. tuberculosis cultured under nutrient starvation. Through the label-free LC-MS/MS analysis of fractionated samples, 1176 proteins were identified from culture filtrates of log phase and nutrient-starved cultures, and the protein levels of 230 proteins were increased in nutrient-starved culture filtrates, whereas those of 208 proteins were decreased. By means of Gene Ontology clustering analysis, significant differences in the overall metabolism during nutrient starvation were detected. Notably, members of the toxin–antitoxin systems were present in larger quantities in nutrient-starved cultures, supporting a role for these global modules as M. tuberculosis switches its metabolism into dormancy. Decreased abundance of proteins involved in amino acid and protein synthesis was apparent, as well as changes in the lipid metabolism. Further analysis of the dataset identified increased abundance of lipoproteins and decreased abundance of ESAT-6 family proteins. Results from the two-dimensional difference gel electrophoresis proteomics demonstrated overall agreement with the LC-MS/MS data and added complementary insights about protein degradation and modification.
METHODS:
EXPERIMENTAL PROCEDURES
Mycobacterial Cultures
Cultures were initiated from frozen seed stocks of M. tuberculosis H37Rv (ATCC 27294). For starter cultures, bacteria were grown to an optical density of 580 nm of ca. 1.0 (late log phase) in modified Sauton medium under shaking conditions at 37 °C. 500-ml polycarbonate Erlenmeyer flasks (Corning, Acton, MA) containing 200 ml of modified Sauton medium were inoculated with 2 × 106 bacteria per milliliter from the starter culture and placed in a standard shaking incubator at 37°C. After 7 days of growth to log phase, cultures were pelleted, washed twice with PBS, and resuspended in 200 ml PBS; this was followed by incubation for 6 weeks without shaking. Control log phase cultures were obtained after 7 days of culturing in 200 ml modified Sauton medium in 500-ml flasks at 37 °C under shaking conditions. The viability of the cultures was assessed by counting colony-forming units (cfu) of serial dilutions of triplicate cultures on 7H11 agar plates. Student's t test was applied to compare log10 transformed cfu counts at the onset and after 6 weeks of starvation.
Culture Filtrate Preparation and Analyses
After harvesting of cultures, the culture medium was collected, sterile filtered, and concentrated approximately 160 times in Centriprep-3 ultrafiltration units (Millipore, Carrigtwohill, Ireland). Protein concentrations were determined via the 2D-Quant method (GE Healthcare, Uppsala, Sweden).
The extracellular DNA concentration in culture filtrates (CFs) was determined using the PicoGreen® double-stranded DNA Quantitation Kit per the manufacturer's instructions (Invitrogen, Abingdon, UK).
For Western blot analysis, 10%–20% Tris-Glycine PAGE® precast gels (Cambrex, Rockland, ME) were used, and proteins were transferred to nitrocellulose as described elsewhere. The following specific antibodies were used: mouse monoclonal antibody (Mab) anti-EsxA HYB 76–8, rabbit polyclonal antibody anti-EsxB K8493, mouse Mab anti-EsxH/EsxR PV-2, and mouse Mab anti-GroEL2 HAT5. The development was performed using ECL (GE Healthcare).
One-dimensional Gel Electrophoresis and LC-MS/MS
The CF proteome was analyzed via gel LC-MS/MS as described elsewhere. In brief, the CF proteins were separated via SDS-PAGE using pre-cast 4%–12% gradient gels (NuPAGE MES system, Invitrogen) and the gels were stained with Coomassie R-250. The six SDS-PAGE lanes containing three biological replicates of log phase and starvation CF samples were cut into 10 bands, and the 60 resulting bands were processed by means of in-gel trypsin digestion according to the method of Shevchenko et al.. The volume of the gel-extracted peptide digests was reduced to 50 μl in a vacuum centrifuge. Next, the peptides were separated by means of reverse-phase chromatography (Ultimate 3000 nanoLC system, Dionex LC-Packings, Amsterdam, The Netherlands) and eluting peptides were ionized (Nanomate Triversa Chip-based nanospray source with Triversa LC coupler, Advion, Ithaca, NJ) and analyzed on an LTQ-FT hybrid mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher, Bremen, Germany). Intact peptide masses were measured in the ICR cell and, in parallel, following a Fourier transform pre-scan, the top five peptide signals (charge states of 2+ and higher) were submitted to MS/MS in the linear ion trap.
LTQ-FT raw files were searched with Sequest using the Proteome Discoverer 1.3.0.339 data analysis package (Thermo Fisher, San Jose, CA). The following spectrum filters were applied: minimum precursor mass of 350 Da, maximum precursor mass of 5000 Da, minimum peak count of 1, and minimum S/N threshold of 1.5. The following parameters were used in the Sequest search: full tryptic specificity, maximum of two missed cleavages, maximum number of peptides considered = 500, maximum peptide output of 10, Absolute Xcorr threshold of 0, fragment ion cut-off percentage of 0.01, protein relevance threshold of 1.5, peptide relevance factor of 0.4, precursor mass tolerance of 10 ppm, fragment mass tolerance of 1 Da, and only b and y ions considered. A maximum of four modifications were allowed per peptide, and both cysteine carbamidomethylation and methionine oxidation were allowed as variable modifications. MS/MS spectra were searched against the M. tuberculosis H37Rv FASTA file downloaded from the Sanger Centre, with 3993 entries (created January 2010 based on GenBank accession number AL123456). Spectra were searched using Sequest, and Proteome Discoverer MSF files were imported in Scaffold 3.4.9 for peptide validation and data organization. Sequest search files were combined per biological sample (10 gel bands per sample). Peptide identifications were accepted if they could be established at greater than 95.0% probability as specified by the Peptide Prophet algorithm, which is part of Scaffold. Peptide Prophet calculates the identification probability for each peptide identification using Bayesian statistics. Protein identifications were accepted if they could be established at greater than 99.0% probability and contained at least two identified peptides in at least one biological sample. Protein probabilities were assigned by the Protein Prophet algorithm; this algorithm performed the protein inference from identified peptides and is also part of Scaffold. Proteins that contained similar peptides and could not be differentiated based on MS/MS analysis alone were grouped (designated by “+1” in supplemental Table S1). 1372 proteins were identified with a minimum of two peptides in at least one of the samples; 10 out of these 1372 identified proteins represented reversed hits, indicating a protein false discovery rate of 0.7%. The total number of forward identifications therefore was 1362 (supplemental Table S1). The mass spectrometry proteomics data (raw data, search, and peak list files) have been deposited at the ProteomeXchange Consortium with the dataset identifier PXD000111.
Relative protein quantitation was performed via spectral counting of the number of MS/MS spectra associated with an identified protein (number of “assigned spectra” as reported by Scaffold). Modified peptides were included in the spectral counts. Peptides shared between proteins (or between different protein groups) were excluded from the spectral counts. Spectral counting was used to quantify the relative abundance of individual proteins in different biological samples; spectral counting was not used for the estimation of the (relative or absolute) protein abundance of different proteins. Spectral counts were summed for each protein for each biological sample (10 gel bands). For each biological sample, the protein loading on gel, as well as the gel band pattern and intensity, was highly similar. For quantitation by means of spectral counting, lower scoring peptide matches of identified proteins also were retained. Spectral counts per protein per sample were normalized on the sum of the spectral counts for each sample (10 gel bands combined) and multiplied with the average sum across biological samples.
Significantly changed proteins were identified using the beta binomial test, a fold change of 1.5 (normalized spectral count ratio starvation CF/log phase) and p value of 0.01 were used as combined thresholds to define biologically changed proteins, and those proteins identified in starvation CF or log phase only were assigned fold changes of 100 or 0.01, respectively.
Gene Ontology Clustering Analysis
In order to characterize the set of increased and decreased proteins for biological interpretation, a gene ontology (GO) analysis was undertaken. Only M. tuberculosis proteins identified either in all three log phase CF samples or in all three starvation CF samples were included in the analysis. The protein Rv numbers were obtained from TubercuList and were used for defining the list of total detected proteins in the dataset. GO terms for identified proteins were extracted from UniProt, and overrepresented functional categories for differentially abundant proteins were determined using the GOMiner tool. A cutoff p value of less than 0.05 was used, and for overlapping GO groups, one representative category was selected within the dataset. The minimum size of the categories was set at five proteins.
Two-dimensional DIGE Analysis
Each gel experiment included the log phase and starvation CF samples in triplicate. Two-dimensional DIGE was performed as described elsewhere. Briefly, 50 μg of each sample was prepared for two-dimensional DIGE using the 2D Clean-up kit (GE Healthcare) and resolubilized in 30 mm Tris, 7 m urea, 2 m thio-urea, and 4% CHAPS, pH 8.5. Cy2, Cy3, and Cy5 minimal labeling was performed with 125 pmol of each CyDye according to the manufacturer's instructions (GE Healthcare), and isoelectric focusing with pH 4–7 immobilized pH gradient strips (GE Healthcare) was performed as described elsewhere. Cy2-, Cy3-, and Cy5-labeled samples were applied during the rehydration step in 8 m urea, 2% CHAPS, 0.5% immobilized pH gradient buffer, and 18 mm DTT. The second-dimension separation was performed in 10% to 20% Tris-glycine SDS-PAGE 16 cm × 16 cm gradient gels in the Protean IIxi system (Bio-Rad, Richmond, CA). Each two-dimensional gel included a log phase and a starvation CF sample, as well as a Cy2-labeled internal standard (a pool of all samples in the experiment) to allow the correction of inter-gel variation. Labeling was performed so that both log phase and starvation CF samples were labeled with Cy3 and Cy5 to account for the preferential labeling of proteins by either of the CyDyes. After electrophoresis, the gels were scanned by a Typhoon 9410 gel imager, and spot images were analyzed with the Image Master Platinum 2.0 software (GE Healthcare). The Cy2-labeled standard was used for normalization by the default normalization algorithm; spots that displayed a more than 1.5-fold difference in volume ratio, p < 0.05 (Student's t test), were selected for further characterization, and the fold change was calculated for each spot. The proteins identified in starvation CF or log phase only were assigned fold changes of 100 or 0.01, respectively. The two-dimensional DIGE gels were then silver stained using the method developed by Blum et al., adapted for mass spectrometry compatibility as described elsewhere, except that methanol was replaced by ethanol. Spots selected for identification were then excised manually and digested with trypsin.
Protein Identification by Peptide Mass Fingerprinting and MS/MS
Peptides were analyzed via MALDI-TOF-MS and MALDI-TOF-MS/MS on an ABI 4700 TOF-TOF or ABI 4800 TOF-TOF instrument (Applied Biosystems, Foster City, CA). External calibration was performed using a tryptic peptide mixture of bovine beta-lactoglobulin. Mass spectra were analyzed using the software package MoverZ (m/z) (version 2001.08.08; Genomic Solutions, Ann Arbor, MI); the peak lists were internally calibrated, and keratin and trypsin contaminants were removed using the PeakErazor program (version 2.02, Lighthouse Data, Odense, Denmark). Peak lists were searched against the NCBI database (20091218, 10227800 sequences or 20100728, 11505486 sequences) using Mascot (version 2.2.06, Matrix Science, London, UK) in the peptide mass fingerprinting search or the MS/MS ion search. Fixed modifications included the carbamidomethylation of Cys, and variable modifications included the oxidation of Met. The peptide mass tolerance was set at ±25 ppm, the maximum number of missed cleavages by trypsin was 1, and all entries were included in the search.