ABSTRACT:
Analysis of serum and plasma proteomes is a common approach for biomarker discovery, and the removal of high abundant proteins, such as albumin and immunoglobins, is usually the first step in the analysis of serum and plasma proteomes. However, albumin binds peptides and proteins, which raises concerns as to how the removal of albumin could impact the outcome of the biomarker study while ignoring the possibility that this could be a biomarker sub-proteome itself. The first goal of this study was to test a new commercially available affinity capture reagent from Protea Biosciences and to compare the efficiency and reproducibility to 4 other commercially available albumin depletion methods. The second goal of this study was to determine if there is a highly efficient albumin depletion/isolation system that minimizes sample handling and would be suitable for large numbers of samples. Two of the methods tested (Sigma and ProteaPrep) showed an albumin depletion efficiency of 97% or greater for both serum and cerebrospinal fluid (CSF). Isolated serum and CSF albuminomes from ProteaPrep spin columns were analyzed directly by LC-MS/MS, identifying 128 serum (45 not previously reported) and 94 CSF albuminome proteins (17 unique to the CSF albuminome). Serum albuminome was also isolated using Vivapure anti-HSA columns for comparison, identifying 105 proteins, 81 of which overlapped with the ProteaPrep method.
METHODS:
2 MATERIALS AND METHODS
2.1 Materials and reagents used can be found in the Supplemental Material and Methods
2.2 Depletion of HSA and/or IgG from human serum and CSF using multiple depletion methods
Albumin and IgG were depleted from pooled human serum using seven different methods: 1) ProteaPrep HSA spin columns, 2) ProteaPrep HSA 96-well plate, 3) ProteaPrep HSA/IgG depletion column, 4) Protein G-NaCl/EtOH depletion method, 5) Vivapure anti-HSA/IgG depletion kit, 6) Sigma Blue HSA/IgG depletion kit, and 7) Sigma anti-HSA/IgG depletion columns. HSA was depleted from pooled human CSF using ProteaPrep HSA and Sigma anti-HSA/IgG spin columns. Depletion was carried out for all methods according to the manufacturer’s protocol with slight modifications in some instances. Protein G-NaCl/EtOH method was carried out as previously described. Control samples (no depletion) were prepared by mixing 10 μL of serum and 100 μL of CSF with 390 μL and 300 μL of 10 mM PBS, respectively. Protein concentration was determined by the BCA method for each depleted sample and samples were qualitatively analyzed by 1D-SDS-PAGE and immunoblot. HSA depletion efficiency was quantitatively analyzed by multiple reaction monitoring (MRM) for the three best HSA depletion methods from serum (ProteaPrep HSA/IgG, Protein G/NaCl, Sigma anti-HSA/IgG) and the two methods used for HSA depletion from CSF. A detailed description of the protocols for each depletion method and for SDS-PAGE and immunoblot analysis can be found in the Supplemental Material and Methods.
2.3 Isolation and LC-MS/MS analysis of serum and CSF albuminomes
Serum and CSF albuminomes isolated from ProteaPrep HSA columns and serum albuminome isolated from Vivapure anti-HSA columns were trypsin digested and analyzed in triplicate on an EASY-nLC 1000 connected to an Orbitrap Elite (Thermo) equipped with a nanoelectrospray ion source. The data is available in PRIDE through the ProteomeXchange (http://proteomecentral.proteomexchange.org/cgi/GetDataset) accession number PXD000036. Detailed protocols for albuminome isolation as well as LC-MS/MS conditions and database search parameters can be found in the Supplemental Material and Methods.