ABSTRACT:
Lignocellulosic materials from municipal solid waste emerge as attractive resources for anaerobic digestion biorefinery. To increase the knowledge required for establishing efficient bioprocesses, dynamics of batch fermentation by the cellulolytic bacterium Ruminiclostridium cellulolyticum were compared using three cellulosic materials, paper handkerchief, cotton discs and Whatman filter paper. Fermentation of paper handkerchief occurred the fastest and resulted in a specific metabolic profile: it resulted in the lowest acetate-to-lactate and acetate-to-ethanol ratios. By shotgun proteomic analyses of paper handkerchief and Whatman paper incubations, 151 proteins with significantly different levels were detected, including 20 of the 65 cellulosomal components, 8 non-cellulosomal CAZymes and 44 distinct extracytoplasmic proteins. Consistent with the specific metabolic profile observed, many enzymes from the central carbon catabolic pathways had higher levels in paper handkerchief incubations. Among the quantified CAZymes and cellulosomal components, 10 endoglucanases mainly from the GH9 families and 7 other cellulosomal subunits had lower levels in paper handkerchief incubations. An in-depth characterization of the materials used showed that the lower levels of endoglucanases in paper handkerchief incubations could hypothetically result from its lower crystallinity index (50%) and degree of polymerization (970). By contrast, the higher hemicellulose rate in paper handkerchief (13.87%) did not result in the enhanced expression of enzyme with xylanase as primary activity, including enzymes from the “xyl-doc” cluster. It suggests the absence, in this material, of molecular structures that specifically lead to xylanase induction. The integrated approach developed in this work shows that subtle differences among cellulosic materials regarding chemical and structural characteristics have significant effects on expressed bacterial functions, in particular the cellulolysis machinery, resulting in different metabolic patterns and degradation dynamics.
METHODS:
Materials and Methods
Bacterial strain and culture conditions
R. cellulolyticum H10 ATCC 35319 (DSM 5812) was grown anaerobically at 37°C, as indicated on ATCC website (www.lgcstandards-atcc.org/Products/Cells_and_Microorganisms/Bacteria/Alphanumeric_Genus__Species/35319.aspx#culturemethod). The basal medium (initial pH 7.1) contained, per liter: Na2HPO4, 0.4 g; KH2PO4, 0.4 g; NH4Cl, 0.3 g; NaCl, 0.3 g; MgCl2, 0.1 g; CaCl2, 0.1 g; NaHCO3, 4.0 g; Na2S.9H2O, 0.2 g. The medium was supplemented with 0.2 mL/L of vitamin solution and 1 mL/L of acid and alkaline trace element solutions (each). 5 mg/L resazurin were added to the medium as a redox indicator. Inoculation was realized with 10% (v/v) of a pre-adapted culture grown on 1 g/L Sigmacell microcrystalline cellulose in 125 mL flasks with 50 mL working volume. Three cellulosic materials were used separately as sole carbon substrates: cotton pads (“Cotton”, Leader Price, Disques à Démaquiller—Simplement, Duo face, 100% cotton), Whatman qualitative filter paper, Grade 1 (“Whatman Paper”, 1001–125, 11 μm, 125 mm diameter) and paper handkerchief (“Tissue”, Lotus Classic, large handkerchiefs, made from pure cellulose fibers, pure virgin pulp). These substrates were cut in bands (~1.5 cm x 5 cm) and added to each flask to a final concentration of 2.5 g/L. For each cellulosic substrate separately, triplicate flasks were dedicated to physico-chemical monitoring of the degradation dynamics. For Tissue and Whatman paper separately, six additional replicate flasks by substrate were operated and sacrificed at 2 different time points for proteomic analyses during the incubation.
Physico-chemical analyses of the incubation samples
At each sampling time, fresh samples (2 mL) were recovered from the 125 mL flasks and centrifuged at 10 000g for 10 min at 4°C. The obtained pellets and supernatants were stored separately at -80°C. Volatile fatty acid concentrations (including lactate and acetate) were measured using a DX 120 Ion Chromatograph (Dionex) with an IonPAc ICE-AS1 column. Ethanol concentrations were quantified by headspace gas chromatography—mass spectrometry (GC-MS) (Trace GC Ultra and DSQ II from Thermo with a TR-WAX column (30 m length, 0.25 mm intern diameter, 0.25 μm thick polyethylene glycol film).
DNA extraction and quantification
DNA was extracted from the pellets with the PowerSoil DNA Isolation Kit (MO BIO Laboratories, Inc., Carlsbad, CA, USA) according to the manufacturer’s instructions and was quantified with the fluorescence-based Qubit dsDNA HS assay (Life Technologies). The obtained values were multiplied by a constant factor specific of each DNA extraction series to take into account the extraction yields. Based on R. cellulolyticum genome size, it was estimated that 1 ng of DNA corresponded to 227,703 genome copies.
Physico-chemical characterization of the substrates
The total solids and volatile solids in each substrate were calculated from the moisture and ash content, determined by oven-drying, following instructions described in EN ISO 12879 and EN ISO 12880. Material elemental composition was analyzed using a Vario EL III (Elementar Analysensysteme GmbH, Hanau, Germany). Chemical oxygen demand was measured on solid substrates with the LCK 514 kit (Hach Lange) according to the manufacturer’s instructions.
To determine the crystallinity index, diffraction diagrams were monitored by recording X-ray diffraction diagrams every 10 min on a Bruker D8 Discover diffractometer. Cu Kα1 radiation (Cu Kα1 = 1.5405 Å), produced in a sealed tube at 40 kV and 40 mA, was selected and parallelized using a Gobël mirror parallel optics system and collimated to produce a 500 μm beam diameter. Crystallinity index was calculated based on, as follows: 
With A the value obtained for the amorphous standard, C the value obtained for crystalline standard and U the value obtained for the sample.
To determine the molar mass distribution of the cellulosic substrates, the latter were dissolved in N,N-dimethylacetamide (DMAc) and derivatized by tri-carbanilation using phenylisocyanate as reactant (reaction time 5 days at 40°C). The reaction was quenched with methanol and direct samples from the obtained solutions were analyzed after dilution in tetrahydrofurane (THF) in a size-exclusion chromatographic system (Viscotek TDA-302 apparatus) equipped with 3 Varian PLGel Mixed B columns (7.8×300) with a guard column. The coupled detection was UV at 260 nm, DRI, RALS/LALS/RI at 670 nm (laser 3 mW, 670 nm) and viscometer detector. DRI was used as concentration detector and UV as control. The chromatographic solvent was THF, injected concentrations were 1 mg/mL (injection volume 100 microliter), and the dn/dC of cellulose tricarbanilate in THF was taken at a predetermined value of 0.165. Data were treated by the OmniSec™ (4.5.6. version) program (Malvern Co.).
The lignocellulose sugar content of the samples was determined by the commercial facility of Celignis Analytical (http://www.celignis.com, Analysis Package P7, substrate hydrolysis followed by ion chromatography). Van Soest fractionation of the substrates was performed by the commercial facility of INRA Transfert Environnement as in (https://www6.montpellier.inra.fr/it-e).
Proteomic analyses
Total proteome and exoproteome extraction and shotgun MS/MS analyses
After 46 h and 70 h of incubation, 3 flasks for each substrate were sacrificed at each time point and sampled for proteomic analyses. The total volume, except 2 mL used for chemical analyses, was supplemented with 1 mM Phenylmethylsulfonyl Fluoride to inhibit protease activity and centrifuged at 6 000g for 20 min. The collected supernatant was further centrifuged at 13 000g for 15 min. Pellets from the first centrifugation round and supernatants from the second one were frozen in liquid nitrogen immediately and stored at -80°C. Proteins from the pellets were extracted as described in with minor modifications. Briefly, cell disruption was performed by bead-beating of the pellets resuspended in 1X PBS using 0.1 mm silica and glass beads, and by a subsequent ultrasonication step. Proteins were extracted using liquid phenol and precipitated with ammonium acetate in methanol. After several washing steps, the protein pellets were resuspended in buffer (7 M urea, 2 M thiourea, 4% (w/v) CHAPS) as described in and stored at -80°C. Culture supernatants were filtered through 0.22 μm PVDF membrane filters and proteins were precipitated and resuspended as described above. Protein concentrations were measured using an Agilent 2100 Bioanalyzer with the High Sensitivity Protein 250 kit following the manufacturer’s instructions.
For each sample, 5μg of each whole proteome were classically purified by SDS-PAGE, digested by trypsin in gel and analyzed by LC-MS/MS on a LTQ-Orbitrap Discovery mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher, USA). Peptide separation was realized with an Ultimate 3000 RSLCnano system (Dionex, Voisins le Bretonneux, France) using a long gradient and a C18 column (Pepmap100, 0.075 x 50 cm, 100 Å, 2 μm, Thermo) during 188 min to enhance the resolution and the sensitivity of peptide detection by mass spectrometry. A detailed protocol is provided S1 File.
Protein database search and label free quantification
The data processing pipeline was designed using the TOPPAS software, part of the OpenMS project. X!Tandem (directly provided in the OpenMS archive) was used to perform database searches in batch mode. Peak lists were created by an OpenMS dedicated tool with an additional processing step. Indeed, a precursor recalculation was computed for each tandem spectrum to improve the number of matches between a spectrum and a peptide sequence. While proteins were digested with trypsin, the analysis program allowed for 2 missed trypsin cleavage sites. Cysteine carbamidomethylation was set as a fixed modification; methionine oxidation and protein N-terminal acetylation were set as variable modifications for all X!Tandem searches. The mass tolerances in MS and MS/MS were set to 10 ppm and 0.6 Da respectively. Data were searched against a target/decoy concatenated database to obtain a false discovery rate (FDR) value at the peptide level. All identifications were validated with a final peptide FDR of 5% and a calculated protein FDR of 1%.
For the relative quantification based on eXtracted Ion Chromatogram (XIC), peaks were detected in each sample using the « PeakPickerCentroid » algorithm (OpenMS software). Validated identification data were matched with detected peaks. Peaks which were assigned to the same peptide sequence in different samples were used as anchors for retention time alignment between those samples. A Protein Abundance Index (PAI) was calculated and defined as the average of XIC area values from the three most intense peptides identified for a given protein.
Statistical analyses of the label-free quantification proteome datasets
All statistical analyses were performed using the programming language R on log10-transformed and quantile normalized PAI. The substrate, incubation time and substrate-by-incubation time interaction effects were assessed by Tobit models with a censoring threshold equal to the minimum non-zero value for a given protein. With y*ijkl the normalized log10 PAI of protein l, for the substrate Si, incubation time Tj and replicate k, the model used for each protein is the following:   
Tobit regressions were computed using the Markov chain Monte Carlo algorithm from the R package MCMCpack. Runs that did not pass the Heidelberger and Welch's convergence diagnostic were discarded. Substrate (αil) and interaction (γijl) effect coefficients as well as p-values were determined from the posterior distributions. P-values were adjusted for multiple comparisons using Benjamini and Hochberg’s false discovery rate. The significance threshold used corresponds to a false discovery rate of 1%.
For the supernatants, the proteins with at least one statistically significant effect were filtered to select only proteins likely to be released in the extracellular milieu, cellulosomal proteins and secreted CAZYmes (see next section). The other proteins from the supernatants (cytoplasm/cell wall) were considered as originating from cell lysis.
In silico predictions of protein sub-cellular localization
Prediction of sub-cellular localization was obtained from LocateP database (www.cmbi.ru.nl/locatep-db/cgi-bin/locatepdb.py) and by analyzing R. cellulolyticum protein sequences with the SurfG+ program 1.02 with default parameter values with a local Galaxy instance (migale.jouy.inra.fr/galaxy/). The protein sequences were moreover analyzed with the last available version of specific tools: SignalP 4.1 server (www.cbs.dtu.dk/services/SignalP/), LipoP 1.0 server (www.cbs.dtu.dk/services/LipoP/), SecretomeP 2.0 server (www.cbs.dtu.dk/services/SecretomeP/), TMHMM server v. 2.0 (www.cbs.dtu.dk/services/TMHMM/), selecting the “Gram-positive” option whenever available. The results were manually examined and confronted to the knowledge on R. cellulolyticum proteins, in particular on cellulosomal proteins and cellulases. For ABC transporters, the subfamily name was retrieved from the Archaeal and Bacterial ABC Systems database (ABCdb database www-abcdb.biotoul.fr/) and for peptidases, the Peptidase database identity (MEROPS ID) was indicated (merops.sanger.ac.uk/).
The mass spectrometry proteomic data are available via ProteomeXchange, identifier PXD001051 and DOI 10.6019/PXD001051.