ABSTRACT:
The current knowledge on how transcription factors (TFs), the ultimate targets and executors of cellular signalling pathways, are regulated by protein–protein interactions remains limited. Here, we performed proteomics analyses of soluble and chromatin-associated complexes of 56 TFs, including the targets of many signalling pathways involved in development and cancer, and 37 members of the Forkhead box (FOX) TF family. Using tandem affinity purification followed by mass spectrometry (TAP/MS), we performed 214 purifications and identified 2,156 high-confident protein–protein interactions. We found that most TFs form very distinct protein complexes on and off chromatin. Using this data set, we categorized the transcription-related or unrelated regulators for general or specific TFs. Our study offers a valuable resource of protein–protein interaction networks for a large number of TFs and underscores the general principle that TFs form distinct location-specific protein complexes that are associated with the different regulation and diverse functions of these TFs.
METHODS:
Materials and Methods
Constructs and small hairpin RNAs (shRNAs)
FOXK1 and FOXK2 cDNAs were a generous gift from Dr. Andrew D. Sharrocks (Ji et al,). βTRCP (R474A) cDNA was a generous gift from Dr. Wenyi Wei (Inuzuka et al,). cDNAs encoding other known FOX proteins and TP53, MYC, MAX, RBPJ, TCF4, TEAD, JUN, FOS, NF-κB, SMAD4, ATF6, CREB1, ETS1, GLI1, IRF3, MEF2A, NFATC1, PPARG, STAT3, L3MBTL2, L3MBTL3, E2F6, HOXD13, ATF1, ATF2, ATF3, ATF7, HMGA1, ZNF131, KDM1, FBXO42, NFIX, CBX3, EPC2, MTERF, XRCC1, TFAP2A, VRK3, MECP2, TFDP1, EEF1D, LIG3, RPA2, H2AFY, RECQL, PARS2, DDX52, QARS, C1orf25, DARS, ORC2L, PES1, IARS2, SMARCA1, SMARCA5, LARS, LRWD1, ZC3H11A, CDC27, RB1, RBL1, PNKP, TAF5L, ARHGEF2, RFX1, βTRCP and βTRCP2 were obtained from the hORFV5.1 library and Open Biosystems. cDNAs were subcloned into the pDONR201 vector (Invitrogen) as entry clones and subsequently transferred to gateway-compatible destination vectors for the expression of C-terminal SFB-, MYC-, GFP-tagged fusion proteins. Point or deletion mutants were generated using sequential PCR methods and verified by sequencing. FOXN2 DNA binding-defective mutant H162R was generated based on the conserved DNA-binding domain reported for FOXO3 (Harada et al,).
Four individual pGIPZ lentiviral shRNAs targeting βTRCP, βTRCP2, CUL1, ARHGEF2, TRRAP, TAF5L, CDC27, RB1, RBL1, PNKP, FOXK1, EP300, CREBBP, MECP2, LIG3, TFAP2A, TBP, FOXK2, L3MBTL2, SMARCA1, RPA2, EEF1D, WIZ, TFDP1, TWIST1, SAP130, H2AFY, XRCC1, RECQL, VRK3, MTERF, MORC2, BAZ1A, MXI1 and MXD4 were obtained from the shRNA and ORFeome core facility at The University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center. All lentiviral supernatants were generated by transient transfection of 293T cells with packaging plasmids pSPAX2 and pMD2G and harvested 48 h later. Supernatants were passed through a 0.45-μm filter and used to infect HEK293T and MCF10A cells with the addition of 8 μg/ml polybrene.
Cell culture, treatments and transfection
HEK293T cells were cultured in Dulbecco's modified Eagle's medium supplemented with 10% foetal bovine serum and 1% penicillin and streptomycin. MCF10A cells were cultured in Dulbecco's modified Eagle's medium/F12 supplemented with 5% horse serum, 10 μg/ml insulin, 20 μg/ml epidermal growth factor, 0.5 μg/ml hydrocortisone, 0.1 μg/ml cholera toxin and 1% penicillin and streptomycin.
The activity of several TFs, such as SMAD4 and NF-κB1, can be greatly influenced by specific signalling events. For this reason, we also treated some stable cells with drugs to promote the nuclear translocation of some TFs. We performed purifications of SMAD4 with treatment of 5 ng/ml TGFβ or BMP4 for 16 h, TCF4 with treatment of 10 mM LiCl for 16 h or NF-κB1, JUN, FOS with treatment of 25 ng/ml TNF-α for 8 h to promote chromatin association of the corresponding TFs. In many cases, we were able to isolate chromatin-associated proteins of these TFs even without any treatment.
Constructs encoding C-terminally SFB-tagged TFs were transfected into HEK293T cells using polyethylenimines as previously described (Wang et al,). Cells were selected with puromycin and 12–24 single clones were picked, examined by Western blotting and immunostaining. We chose the ones with the correct subcellular localizations and the lowest expression for the subsequent TAP/MS analysis.
TAP of TF-associated protein complexes and MS analysis
A total of 1 × 108 HEK293T cells stably expressing tagged TFs were lysed with NETN buffer [20 mM Tris–HCl (pH 8.0), 100 mM NaCl, 1 mM EDTA and 0.5% Nonidet P-40, containing 1 μg/ml each of pepstatin A and aprotinin] for 30 min. Crude lysates were saved as the soluble fraction by centrifugation at 16,000 g at 4°C for 30 min, and the pellet was digested with TurboNuclease (Accelagen) for 10 min in digesting buffer [50 mM Tris (pH 8), 1 mM MgCl2 and protease inhibitor] to extract chromatin-bound proteins. The supernatants were cleared at 16,000 g to remove debris from chromatin-bound protein fractions. Both fractions were then incubated with streptavidin-conjugated beads (Amersham) for 2 h at 4°C. The beads were washed three times with NETN buffer, and the bead-bound proteins were eluted with NETN buffer containing 2 mg/ml biotin (Sigma). The elutes were incubated with S-protein beads (Novagen). The beads were again washed three times with NETN buffer and subjected to SDS–PAGE. Protein band containing the entire sample was excised, and MS analyses were performed by the TAPLIN Biological Mass Spectrometry Facility of Harvard University.
For MS analysis, excised gel bands were cut into approximately 1-mm3 pieces. Gel pieces were then subjected to in-gel trypsin digestion and dried. Samples were reconstituted in 5 μl of HPLC solvent A (2.5% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid). A nano-scale reverse-phase HPLC capillary column was created by packing 5-μm C18 spherical silica beads into a fused silica capillary (100 μm inner diameter × ∽20 cm length) with a flame-drawn tip. After equilibrating the column, each sample was loaded via a Famos autosampler (LC Packings, San Francisco, CA) onto the column. A gradient was formed and peptides were eluted with increasing concentrations of solvent B (97.5% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid).
As peptides eluted, they were subjected to electrospray ionization and then entered into an LTQ Velos ion trap mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher, San Jose, CA). Peptides were detected, isolated and fragmented to produce a tandem mass spectrum of specific fragment ions for each peptide. Peptide sequences (and hence protein identity) were determined by matching the acquired fragmentation pattern with protein databases by the software program, SEQUEST (ver. 28) (Thermo Fisher). Enzyme specificity was set to partially tryptic with two missed cleavages. Modifications included carboxyamidomethyl (cysteines, fixed) and oxidation (methionine, variable). Mass tolerance was set to 2.0 for precursor ions and 1.0 for fragment ions. The database searched was the Human IPI databases version 3.6. The number of entries in the database was 160,900, which includes both the target (forward) and the decoy (reversed) human sequences. Spectral matches were filtered to contain < 1% FDR at the peptide level based on the target-decoy method. Finally, only tryptic matches were reported and spectral matches were manually examined. When peptides matched to multiple proteins, the peptide was assigned so that only the most logical protein was included (Occam's razor). This same principle was used for isoforms when present in the database. The longest isoform was reported as the match. Supplementary Tables S3 and S4 contain the lists of both the peptides identified and the proteins identified during these analyses.
The mass spectrometry data from this publication, including raw files and search results, have been deposited to ProteomeXchange (www.proteomexchange.org) with identifier PXD001383 and DOI 10.6019/PXD001383.
Data analysis and bioinformatics analysis
We downloaded protein sequences from the UniProt Consortium. The function annotations were generated through the use of Ingenuity Pathway Analysis software (www.ingenuity.com). The heatmap and clustering were generated using Multi Experiment Viewer version 4.8.1 (TM4) and Heatmap Builder (Dr. Euan Ashley, Stanford University) software.
For MS data filtration, protein results from MS sequencing were converted to NCBI gene identifiers and searched for protein length. We reorganized the data to the format compatible to the SAINT program and used two-pool analysis, which recognized control group as a separate pool. We did not remove outlier datapoints. However, during the data analysis, we temporarily removed the bait self-identification in the identification list before applying the SAINT algorithms and added them back after the data filtration. The separation of positive and negative distributions was considered for the scoring of low-count interactions or for division of spectra counts by the total spectra counts of each purification. The statistics used to assess accuracy and significance of measurements was referred to the SAINT algorithms, where Xij > 0.80 was taken as the threshold required for the data quantification.
For interactomes generated by Cytoscape, we analysed the network and created custom styles, then applied yFiles organic layout or unweighted force-directed distributions with minor adjustments when necessary. The GO annotations and disease correlations were generated using the literature or non-self HCIPs identified in our studies, weighted by the spectra counts and searched in the Knowledge Base provided by Ingenuity pathway software (Ingenuity Systems, www.ingenuity.com), which contains findings and annotations from multiple sources including the Gene Ontology database, to estimate the significance of these correlations.
ChIP-sequencing and genomic data analysis
ChIP-sequencing was performed in HEK293T cells with two biological replicates. Samples were sequenced using the Illumina Miseq, raw reads were mapped to human reference genome (hg19), and peaks were selected using MACS in Galaxy and annotated with PAVIS (Zhang et al,; Langmead et al,; Huang et al,). Data are available in the ArrayExpress database www.ebi.ac.uk/arrayexpress (Rustici et al,) under accession number E-MTAB-3120.
Analysis of the NFATC1-, CREB1- and ATF2-bound regions was performed using ChIP-seq data sets generated by the ENCODE consortium in GM12878 cells (ENCODE-Project-Consortium,). Data sets were analysed in Galaxy and mapped to genes using PAVIS with −5000 to +1000 TSS windows.
Western blotting and immunostaining
Whole-cell lysates were prepared by lysing cells with NETN buffer [20 mM Tris–HCl (pH 8.0), 100 mM NaCl, 1 mM EDTA and 0.5% Nonidet P-40] on ice for 30 min and then boiling in 2× Laemmli buffer. Lysates were subjected to SDS–PAGE followed by immunoblotting with antibodies against various proteins, including TP53, c-MYC (the same one used for MYC-tag WB), GFP, GAPDH, FOXN2 (Santa Cruz Biotechnology), FOXK1, FOXM1, FOXO3, JUN, MAX, MYC (for endogenous MYC blotting), NF-κB1, STAT3, TCF4, βTRCP, CUL1 (Cell Signalling), β-actin, FLAG (Sigma), RBPJ, βTRCP2 (Abcam) and histone H3 (Upstate). The rabbit polyclonal anti-FOXD3 antibody was generated by immunizing rabbits (Cocalico Biologicals) with GST-FOXD3 fusion protein and affinity purified.
For immunostaining assays, cells cultured on coverslips were washed with PBS, fixed with 3% paraformaldehyde for 20 min and permeabilized with 0.5% (v/v) Triton X-100 solution for 5 min. Coverslips were washed with PBS and immunostained with primary antibodies in 5% goat serum for 60 min. Cells were then washed and incubated with rhodamine- or FITC-conjugated secondary antibodies for 60 min, and nuclei were stained with 1 μg/ml 4′,6-diamidino-2-phenylindole (DAPI). Slides were mounted and visualized using a Nikon ECLIPSE E800 fluorescence microscope with a Nikon Plan Fluor 40× oil objective lens (numerical aperture 1.30) at room temperature. Cells were photographed using a SPOT camera (Diagnostic Instruments) and analysed using Photoshop software (Adobe).