ABSTRACT:
Microbial colonization of the human gastrointestinal tract plays an important role in establishing health and homeostasis. However, the time-dependent functional signatures of microbial and human proteins during early colonization of the gut have yet to be determined. To this end, we employed shotgun proteomics to simultaneously monitor microbial and human proteins in fecal samples from a preterm infant during the first month of life. Microbial community complexity increased over time, with compositional changes that were consistent with previous metagenomic and rRNA gene data. More specifically, the function of the microbial community initially involved biomass growth, protein production, and lipid metabolism, and then switched to more complex metabolic functions, such as carbohydrate metabolism, once the community stabilized and matured. Human proteins detected included those responsible for epithelial barrier function and antimicrobial activity. Some neutrophil-derived proteins increased in abundance early in the study period, suggesting activation of the innate immune system. Likewise, abundances of cytoskeletal and mucin proteins increased later in the time course, suggestive of subsequent adjustment to the increased microbial load. This study provides the first snapshot of coordinated human and microbial protein expression in a preterm infant’s gut during early development.
METHODS:
2 Materials and Methods
2.1 Description of Preterm Infant
A female infant born at 28 weeks gestation due to premature rupture of membranes was delivered by cesarean section and given antibiotics for the first 7 days of life. Enteral feedings with breast milk were given on days 4–9, and then on days 9–13, feedings were withheld due to abdominal distension. After day 13, enteral feedings were re-administered in the form of artificial infant formula. The baby also received supplemental parenteral nutrition until day 28. The baby had no major anomalies or comorbidities and was discharged to home on day of life 64. Fecal material was collected on days 5–21 as available, with institutional approval, and was immediately stored at −80 °C until analysis. Metagenomic and 16S rRNA data was analyzed in a companion study from matched samples. Based upon sample availability, proteomic measurements were performed on fecal samples from days 7, 13, 15, 16, 17, 18, 20, and 21 after birth.
2.2 Protein Extraction and Enzymatic Digestion of Fecal Samples
Approximately 250 μg fecal material was boiled for five minutes in 1 ml 100 mM Tris-Cl containing 4% w/v SDS and 10 mM DTT, then underwent continuous bead beating on high setting for 30 minutes, in order to lyse cells and denature/reduce proteins. The supernatant was collected, boiled again, spun down (14,000 g), and precipitated with 20% trichloroacetic acid at −80°C overnight. Protein pellets were washed in ice-cold acetone, re-solubilized in 8 M urea diluted in 100 mM Tris-HCl pH 8, and then sonicated using a Branson sonic disruptor in order to break up the pellet (5 minutes at 20%; 10 seconds on, 10 seconds off). Iodoacetamide (IAA) was added to block disulfide bond reformation. Proteins were quantified using Bicinchronic assay (BCA) and between 1–3 mg protein were diluted to 4 M urea in 100 mM Tris-HCl pH 8, and enzymatically digested into peptides using sequencing grade trypsin (Promega) for four hours at room temperature. Peptides were diluted to 2 M urea, a second dose of trypsin added, and digestion continued overnight. An acidic salt solution (200mM NaCl, 0.1% formic acid), was used to clean up the peptides which were then spun through a 10kDa cutoff spin column filter (VWR). Peptides were quantified by BCA assay and stored at −80°C until further use.
2.3 Nano-2D-LC-MS/MS
A 150 μg peptide mixture was loaded via a pressure cell onto a 150 μm inner diameter split-phase fused silica back column (Polymicro Technologies) hand-packed with reverse phase (C18) and strong cation exchange (SCX) resin (Luna, Phenomenex). The back column was washed off-line with 100% Solvent A (95% H2O, 5% CH3CN and 0.1% formic acid) for 15 minutes at ~140 bar to desalt the column. Peptides were placed in line with a nanospray emitter (New Objective) packed with reverse phase material then separated on-line using high performance two-dimensional liquid chromatography. Peptides were eluted from the SCX resin by increasing ammonium acetate salt pulses followed by reverse phase resolution over two hour organic gradients as described previously, ionized via nanospray (200 nl/min) (Proxeon, Cambridge MA), and analyzed using an LTQ Orbitrap Velos mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, San Jose, CA). The mass spectrometer was run in data-dependent mode with the top 10 most abundant peptides in full MS selected for MS/MS, and dynamic exclusion enabled (repeat count=1, 60 s exclusion duration). Full MS scans were collected in the Orbitrap at 30K resolution. Two microscans were collected in centroid mode for both full and MS/MS scans. Technical duplicates were run for all samples. The mass spectrometry proteomics data have been deposited to the ProteomeXchange Consortium (http://proteomecentral.proteomexchange.org) via the PRIDE partner repository with the dataset identifier PXD000114.
2.4 Database Construction and Searching
Metagenomic sequences from matched samples collected on days 10, 16, 18, and 21 were translated, and the predicted protein sequences of the dominant community members were used to generate a search database. These included a Serratia species UC1SER, two closely related Citrobacter strains, UC1CITi and UC1CITii, an Enterococcus species UC1ENC, and associated virus and plasmids UC1ENCp, UC1ENCv, and UC1CITp. Since microbial species from early time points were not represented in the metagenomic sequences, twenty additional isolate sequences were selected, based on 16S rRNA information from matched samples, and added to the search database (acquired from JGI: http://www.hmpdacc-resources.org/cgi-bin/img_hmp/main.cgi in January of 2011). For example, according to the 16S data, Leuconostoc was prevalent on days 5–9. But since metagenomic sequencing was not performed on days 5–9, Leuconostoc would have been absent from the analysis. 16S sequencing could only identify Leuconostoc at the genus level, so we chose a representative species of this genus, Leuconostoc mesenteroides cremoris, to be included in the database. In addition, human protein sequences (NCBI RefSeq_2011) and common contaminants (i.e. trypsin) were appended to the database. All MS/MS spectra were searched against the concatenated database with the SEQUEST algorithm v.27 (rev.9), and filtered with DTASelect version 1.9 to assemble the identified peptides into their corresponding protein sequences (Supporting Information Table S1). Due to carbamidomethylation effects of IAA, a static cysteine modification (+57) was included in all searches. Only proteins identified with two fully tryptic peptides were considered for further biological study. Reversed protein sequences were appended to the database in order to calculate false discovery rates. The final concatenated search database contained 214,520 protein sequences, including forward and reversed sequences (provided in Supporting Information as search_database.fasta). Conservative cross-correlation filters were used to achieve false discovery rates (FDRs) between 0.5–2.4% at the peptide level.
2.5 Database clustering & spectral balancing
Since mass spectrometry based proteomics identifies proteins by their corresponding peptide sequences, data analysis must take into consideration the high levels of protein redundancy within and between species to avoid inflating the total number of proteins identified or misinterpretation of the biological conclusions by over-representing proteins with the same function. Therefore, we applied a bioinformatic clustering algorithm to the database in order improve confidence in protein identification and quantification. Specifically, using the publically-available software, USEARCH v.5.0, microbial proteins were clustered into a protein group if they shared 100% amino acid identity, and human proteins were clustered into a protein group if they contained ≥90% amino acid similarity. These differing similarity thresholds were chosen based on the higher numbers of paralogous proteins present within the human genome, and were supported by plotting similarity thresholds ranging from 0.5–1 against the percent proteome reduction via clustering. Each protein group contained at least one unique peptide. Spectral counts were assigned, balanced, normalized, and adjusted according to methods previously described, yielding adjusted normalized spectral abundance factor (NSAF) values. In total, 4,413 microbial and 3,062 human protein groups were detected across the dataset (Supporting Information Table S2). Protein groups range from singletons to groups that contain multiple protein isoforms. All peptides identified throughout the time course are provided in Table S3).
2.6 Data Analyses
COG (clusters of orthologous group) assignments for each microbial protein sequence were determined by running rpsblast against the COG database from NCBI, using an E-value threshold of 0.00001 and the top hit used for the assignment. Adjusted NSAFs from all microbial protein groups were summed and grouped into their respective (COG) categories. A linear regression analysis, computed using the basic statistical package in R, was used to model the relationship between the proportions of proteins within each COG category and increasing time points. The major canonical pathways for human proteins detected across the dataset were determined using Ingenuity Pathway Analysis (IPA) software (Ingenuity® Systems, www.ingenuity.com). The significance of the association was measured by calculating the ratio of number of detected proteins that map to the pathway divided by the total number of proteins from that pathway (orange boxes). The Fisher’s exact test was used to calculate a p-value determining the probability that the association between the proteins in the dataset and the canonical pathway is explained by chance alone (y-axis). Hierarchical clustering of individual human proteins was carried out using JMP Genomics using the log transformed NSAFs values above and below the median across all time points for each protein.