ABSTRACT:
Background
Clinical outcome of patients with triple-negative breast cancer (TNBC) is highly variable. This study aims to identify and validate a prognostic protein signature for TNBC patients to reduce unnecessary adjuvant systemic therapy.
Methods
Frozen primary tumors were collected from 126 lymph node–negative and adjuvant therapy–naive TNBC patients. These samples were used for global proteome profiling in two series: an in-house training (n = 63) and a multicenter test (n = 63) set. Patients who remained free of distant metastasis for a minimum of 5 years after surgery were defined as having good prognosis. Cox regression analysis was performed to develop a prognostic signature, which was independently validated. All statistical tests were two-sided.
Results
An 11-protein signature was developed in the training set (median follow-up for good-prognosis patients = 117 months) and subsequently validated in the test set (median follow-up for good-prognosis patients = 108 months) showing 89.5% sensitivity (95% confidence interval [CI] = 69.2% to 98.1%), 70.5% specificity (95% CI = 61.7% to 74.2%), 56.7% positive predictive value (95% CI = 43.8% to 62.1%), and 93.9% negative predictive value (95% CI = 82.3% to 98.9%) for poor-prognosis patients. The predicted poor-prognosis patients had higher risk to develop distant metastasis than the predicted good-prognosis patients in univariate (hazard ratio [HR] = 13.15; 95% CI = 3.03 to 57.07; P = .001) and multivariable (HR = 12.45; 95% CI = 2.67 to 58.11; P = .001) analysis. Furthermore, the predicted poor-prognosis group had statistically significantly more breast cancer–specific mortality. Using our signature as guidance, more than 60% of patients would have been exempted from unnecessary adjuvant chemotherapy compared with conventional prognostic guidelines.
Conclusions
We report the first validated proteomic signature to assess the natural course of clinical TNBC.
METHODS:
Methods
Study Design
Patient specimens used to develop and validate a prognostic signature were collected in five European institutes between 1985 and 2005. Triple negativity of tumor tissues was confirmed based on mRNA expression using real-time quantitative polymerase chain reaction with a reported criterion of estrogen receptor (ESR1) less than 0.2, progesterone receptor (PGR) less than 0.1, and human epidermal growth factor receptor (HER2/ERBB2) genes BB2 less than 18. With this criterion, we identified 271 and 61 TNBC tumor tissues from local tissue bank and European Organization for Research and Treatment of Cancer (EORTC) collaborators, respectively. Tissues used in this study were restricted to LNN patients who had not received systemic adjuvant therapy. Patients who developed distant metastasis as first event within 5 years after removal of the primary tumor were considered to have poor prognosis, whereas patients who remained free of distant metastasis for 5 years were defined as having good prognosis. Patients who had bilateral breast cancer were excluded. In addition, inclusion for microdissection and mass spectrometry (MS) profiling depended on sufficient invasive tumor area for microdissection and morphological quality. With the above-mentioned criteria, samples were subsequently rejected on the basis of clinical reasons [patients were diagnosed with positive lymph-nodes (92), received adjuvant chemotherapy (3), had insufficient clinical follow-up (19), and developed local relapse before distant metastasis (26)] and technical reasons [insufficient tumor tissues (33), indistinguishable morphology, and insufficient tumor area for microdissection (32)]. As a consequence, 63 and 64 tumors from training and test sets were prepared for nLC-MS/MS profiling, respectively. One sample was not successfully measured because of machinery failure. Clinical characteristics of the included (n = 126) and excluded (n = 206) subjects are summarized in Supplementary Table 1 (available online). nLC-MS/MS data from 63 samples were used for development of the protein signature (training set), and data from the other 63 samples were used for independent validation (test set) (Table 1; Supplementary Table 2, available online). This study was approved by the local institutional medical ethics committee (MEC 02.953), and wherever possible we adhered to the Reporting Recommendations for Tumor Marker Prognostic Studies.
Experimental Procedures
The dedicated procedure of sample preparation was performed (Supplementary Methods, available online). Tissue samples were cut into 8-µm frozen sections and then microdissected to obtain approximately 4000 breast cancer epithelial cells. Proteins were extracted from microdissected cells, and this was followed by denaturation, reduction, and alkylation. Protein samples were digested at 37oC for 4 hours using MS-grade trypsin (Promega, Madison, WI) at a 1:4 (enzyme/protein) ratio and then acidified for further analysis.
Global proteome profiles of the TNBC samples were recorded on an nLC hyphenated LTQ-Orbitrap-XL MS system (ThermoElectron, Bremen, Germany) (Supplementary Methods, available online). Peptide mixtures were separated on the nLC system with a 3-hour binary gradient (mobile phase A: water; mobile phase B: acetonitrile) in a 3-μm C18 silica-packed 50-cm capillary column with 75-μm inner diameter. Mass spectra were acquired over a mass-to-charge ratio (m/z) range of 400 to 1800 at a resolving power of 30000 at 400 m/z. The five most intensive parent ions from the full scan were isolated and fragmented by collisional activated dissociation in the linear ion trap. Dynamic exclusion was used to increase the number of parent ions selected for fragmentation. Recorded raw nLC-MS/MS data have been submitted to ProteomeXchange (accession number: PXD000260).
Statistical Analysis
The recorded MS spectra from the training and test set were separately analyzed in MaxQuant Software (free-ware available from www.maxquant.org, version 1.1.1.36). To identify a prognostic protein signature, Cox regression analysis was performed to associate protein abundance with metastasis-free survival time of patients in the training set. Cox regression coefficients and corresponding P values were determined for all tested proteins. The assumption of proportionality was verified by a test based on the Schoenfeld residuals. Prognostic proteins were selected with a P value cutoff of less than .01. Weighted protein abundance of the prognostic proteins was computed by multiplication of their protein abundance and corresponding Cox regression coefficients. A relapse score was calculated by summation of weighted protein abundance of all protein(s) in a given predictive model, followed by z score transformation of summed score. Multiple predictive models were constructed from the training set by starting with the protein with the lowest P value and stepwise adding one more protein in the next model. Efficiency of these models was then assessed by summation of three parameters: 1) area under the curve (AUC) of receiver operating characteristic (ROC) curve, 2) Youden’s index at 100% sensitivity (sensitivity + specificity – 1), and 3) reversed model size (1 − ni/n, where ni is the number of proteins in a defined model, and n is the total number of prognostic proteins). The model with the highest efficiency was considered as the best prognostic signature.
The cutoff of the prognostic protein signature was determined from the ROC curve of the training set to ensure 100% sensitivity and highest specificity. The protein signature was validated in the test set at the determined cutoff. Kaplan–Meier survival curves and log-rank test were performed to evaluate the differences in the time to distant metastasis of predicted good and poor prognosis groups. Univariate and multivariable analyses with Cox proportional hazard model were used to assess the prognostic value of the protein signature with and without consideration of the individual clinical prognostic variables.
Pathway analysis was performed to interpret biological function of signature proteins using gene set enrichment analysis. The Supplementary Methods (available online) describe detailed information about MaxQuant settings, statistical software packages, and pathway analysis.