ABSTRACT:
Background
In Europe, Ixodes ricinus ticks are the most important vectors of diseases threatening humans, livestock, wildlife and companion animals. Nevertheless, genomic sequence information is missing and functional annotation of transcripts and proteins is limited. This lack of information is restricting studies of the vector and its interactions with pathogens and hosts. Here we present and integrate the first analysis of the I. ricinus genome with the transcriptome and proteome of the unfed I. ricinus midgut.
Methods
Whole genome sequencing was performed on I. ricinus ticks and the sequences were de novo assembled. In parallel, I. ricinus ticks were dissected and the midgut transcriptome sequenced. Both datasets were integrated by transcript discovery analysis to identify putative genes and genome contigs were screened for homology. An alignment-based and a motif-search-based approach were combined for the annotation of the midgut transcriptome. Additionally, midgut proteins were identified and annotated by mass spectrometry with public databases and the in-house built transcriptome database as references and results were cross-validated.
Results
The de novo assembly of 1 billion DNA sequences to a reference genome of 393 Mb length provides an unprecedented insight into the I. ricinus genome. A homology search revealed sequences in the assembled genome contigs homologous to 89 % of the I. scapularis genome scaffolds indicating coverage of most genome regions. We identified moreover 6,415 putative genes. More than 10,000 transcripts from naïve midgut were annotated with respect of predicted function and/or cellular localization. By combining an alignment-based with a motif-search-based annotation approach, we doubled the number of annotations throughout all functional categories. In addition, 574 gel spots were significantly identified by mass spectrometry (p < 0.05) and 285 distinct proteins expressed in the naïve midgut were annotated functionally and/or for cellular localization. Our systems approach reveals a midgut metabolism of the unfed tick that is prepared to sense and process an anticipated blood meal.
Conclusions
This multiple-omics study vastly extends the publicly available DNA and RNA databases for I. ricinus, paving the way for further in-depth analysis of the most important European disease vector and its interactions with pathogens and hosts.
Electronic supplementary material
The online version of this article (doi:10.1186/s12864-015-1981-7) contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.
METHODS:
Methods
Tick dissection
Pathogen-free I. ricinus ticks were purchased from Charles River Laboratories, Ireland. The colony was initially built up from I. ricinus adults collected in Ireland, Slovakia and Germany.
Prior to extraction or dissection, ticks were first washed in 0.1 % benzalkonium chloride for 5 min, second in 70 % ethanol for 1 min and finally rinsed twice with sterile distilled water. High molecular weight genomic DNA was extracted from whole unfed male adults, while RNA and proteins were obtained from the midguts of unfed female adults. Immediately prior to dissection, ticks were fixed dorsal-side up in a paraffin layer by melting the paraffin locally and inserting the legs and ventral side into the paraffin. Tick were covered with either RNase inhibitor solution (RNAlater, life technologies, Carlsbad, CA, USA) or protease inhibitor solution (Pierce Protease Inhibitor Tablets, Thermo Fisher Scientific Inc., Waltham, MA, USA). Dissection was performed on a cool pack. Explanted midguts were immediately transferred into RNase/protease inhibitor solution and kept on ice until storage at -80 °C.
Genomics and Transcriptomics
a. High Molecular Weight Genomic DNA extraction
High molecular weight DNA was extracted according to a modified protocol from Hill and Gutierrez. In brief, 6 male ticks were frozen in liquid nitrogen and ground with a pestle. Powder was resuspended in 20 volumes of extraction buffer (10 mM Tris-Cl, pH 8.0, 100 mM EDTA and 1 % SDS) and incubated for 30 min at 37 °C under gentle mixing. After centrifugation at 4,000 g for 10 min, proteinase K was added to the supernatant to a final concentration of 50 μg/ml and incubated at 37 °C overnight under gentle mixing. RNase cocktail (0.05 units RNase A and 2 units RNase T1 per mg tick tissue) was added and incubated at 50 °C for 3 h. DNA was extracted using one volume 25:24:1 phenol:chloroform:isoamylalcohol mix and centrifuged for 5 min at 10,000 g and 4 °C. The aqueous phase was transferred to a fresh tube and the extraction repeated. A final extraction was done with 24:1 chloroform:isoamylalcohol. Extracted DNA was precipitated by adding 1/10 volume of 3 M sodium acetate (pH 5.5) and 2 volumes of 100 % ethanol and centrifugation for 10 min and 4 °C at 19,000 g. The pellet was washed with 70 % ice-cold ethanol, dried at room temperature and resuspended in 150 μl TE buffer (10 mM Tris, 1 mM EDTA). DNA was quantified with the Quant-iT Picogreen dsDNA Assay kit (Life technologies, Carlsbad, CA, USA) and integrity of high molecular weight DNA was confirmed by agarose gel electrophoresis.
b. Messenger RNA (mRNA) extraction
One hundred twenty I. ricinus midguts were homogenized in a dounce homogenizer. No technical replicates could be performed due to cost restraints, so a potential bias introduced by sample preparation and/or during the detection/analysis workflow cannot be totally excluded and may skew the results. While this may represent a partial limitation of the study, the biological variation has been reduced by pooling individuals for mRNA extraction, library preparation and sequencing. Total RNA was extracted with TRIzol Reagent (Life technologies, Carlsbad, CA, USA) and DNA was digested with DNAfree kit (Life technologies, Carlsbad, CA, USA) according to the manufacturer’s protocol. RNA was purified by use of RNAcleanXP beads (BeckmanCoulter, Brea, CA, USA) with a sample to beads ratio of 1:1.8. mRNA was extracted with Dynabeads RNA DIRECT Micro Kit (Life technologies, Carlsbad, CA, USA).
c. Library preparation and sequencing
For genomic DNA, a paired-end library was prepared according to the manufacturer’s paired-end sample preparation guide (Illumina, San Diego, CA, USA) and run on an Illumina HiSeq™ 2500 sequencer (Illumina, San Diego, CA, USA) by Ambry Genetics (Aliso Viejo, CA, USA). Initial data processing and base calling of 100 base pair (bp) reads was done with RTA 1.17.20 (HiSeq Control Software 2.0.5, Illumina, San Diego, CA, USA) and sequence quality filtering script was executed in the Illumina CASAVA software (V1.8.2, Illumina, San Diego, CA, USA) by Ambry Genetics (Aliso Viejo, CA, USA).
I. ricinus midgut whole transcriptome library was prepared with the Ion Total RNA-Seq Kit v2 (life technologies, Carlsbad, CA, USA) according to the manufacturer’s protocol. Sequencing was accomplished on an Ion PGM™ sequencer with the Ion PGM™ Template OT2 200 Kit for template preparation and the Ion PGM™ Sequencing 200 Kit v2 for sequencing on Ion 314™ Chips v2 and Ion 318™ Chips (life technologies, Carlsbad, CA, USA) according to the manufacturer’s protocol.
d. De novo assembly
All de novo assemblies were accomplished in CLC Genomics Workbench 7.4 (CLCBio, Aarhus, Denmark). As described recently, CLCbio and other De-Bruijn graph based algorithms like e.g. ABySS and Velvet are well suited for short paired-end reads assemblies and perform comparably. CLCbio was chosen due to its better resource management (especially for memory capacity). In addition, the multiple k-mers based assembly by CLCbio, as it was used for the transcriptome de novo assembly, performed very well in comparison to other assemblers, (namely MIRA, Newbler, SOAPdenovo, Trinity and Velvet-Oases).
Genomic Illumina paired-end reads had a length of 100 bp and were not further trimmed before de novo assembly because of the high accuracy in base calling of the Illumina HiSeq™ 2500 leading to a phred score above 30 for most bases. In this case, the quality increase due to trimming is low and does not affect assembly accuracy, while the number of broken pairs is increased, which may compromise assembly accuracy. Genomic sequences were assembled de novo using a word size of 32 and a bubble size of 80, as recommended for the assembly of large genomes (White paper on de novo assembly in CLC Assembly Cell 4.0, CLCBio, Aarhus, Denmark). Minimum contig length was set to 1 kilobase (Kb); mismatch costs to 2; and insertion and deletion costs to 3. In order to check and to improve the quality of the assembly, paired-end reads were mapped back to the assembled contigs. For the back-mapping, the identical mismatch, insertion and deletion costs were used as for the de novo assembly (2, 3 and 3, respectively); the length fraction was set to 0.5 and the similarity fraction to 0.8. Thereby, local sequence errors (e.g. short insertions or deletions) as well as structural errors (e.g. scaffolding errors) were identified by mismatching reads and contigs were corrected by CLC Genomics Workbench 7.4 (CLCBio, Aarhus, Denmark), if necessary. The assembled genome contigs were analyzed for microbial contamination by alignment against the NCBI bacterial and viral nucleic acid database (04/14/2014) and sequences derived from contaminating microorganisms were removed (CLC Genomics Workbench 7.4, CLCBio, Aarhus, Denmark). An additional check of (microbial) contamination was automatically done by NCBI when uploading the contig sequences into the NCBI database.
Because of the fragmentation of the assembled genome, RNA reads were de novo assembled to allow the identification of transcripts for which there is only an incomplete or fragmented reference in our genome contigs. Ion PGM™ derived reads from midgut transcriptome library had a mean length of 118 bp and were depleted of remaining rRNA sequences by reference mapping (CLC Genomics Workbench 7.4, CLCBio, Aarhus, Denmark) against known rRNA sequences from Ixodes ticks (GenBank: S65924, L34292, Z74479, GU001677 and JF703110) and quality trimmed with FASTX-Toolkit. The first 10 bases and all bases beyond base 300 were removed for all sequences because of a loss of quality. Only sequences with a phred score of 20 over at least 90 % of bases were kept.
While originally high phred scores were implemented, more recent publications are concerned that quality trimming could lead to missing annotations and incomplete transcript reconstruction. A phred score of 20, which corresponds to a base call accuracy of 99 %, ensures a high accuracy of the assembled transcripts while keeping the effect of incomplete transcript reconstruction at a minimum.
The de novo assembly of midgut transcriptomic sequences was performed as described above for mismatch, insertion and deletion costs and correction of contigs. However, due to the expected differences in transcript sizes, word and bubble size were calculated automatically per contig during assembly. The minimum contig length was set to 200 bases.
e. Redundancy analysis, homology comparisons and mapping against I. scapularis scaffolds and I. ricinus genes
The assembled contigs were analyzed for their redundancy with a duplicate removal tool. The contigs were filtered for sequences which share a common sequence of at least 20 bases and an alignment score above 80 % of the optimal score in the rest of the sequence. The optimal score is defined as the score a sequence would get if it aligned perfectly to the consensus for a group of duplicates.
The assembled genome contigs were analyzed for their homology against Dermatophagoides farinae, I. scapularis, Metaseiulus occidentalis and Tetranychus urticae genome scaffolds as well as Rhipicephalus microplus and Varroa destructor genome contigs [NCBI Genbank: ASGP00000000.1, ABJB000000000.1, AFFJ00000000.1, CAEY00000000.1, ADMZ00000000.2 and ADDG00000000.1] by local blastn. Match/mismatch costs were set to 1 and 2, gap costs to 5 for existence and 2 for extension of a gap. The word size was set to 36 and the expectation value to 10.
Mapping of the assembled genome contigs against public I. scapularis genome scaffolds [NCBI Genbank: ABJB000000000.1] was performed with the same mismatch and insertion/deletion costs as for the assembly. Mapping criteria were set to a length fraction of 0.5 and a similarity fraction of 0.8 (at least 50 % of bases need to align to the reference with an overall identity of minimum 80 %).
All I. ricinus genes in the NCBI Genbank at the time of analysis (date: 03/03/2015, 849 genes total) were searched in a blastn analysis against our assembled contigs with match/mismatch cost of 2/3 and gap costs of 5/2 (existence/extension). The word size was set to 11 and the expectation value to 10.
Mapping, local blastn and duplicate removal analyses were performed with CLC Genomics Workbench 7.4 (CLCBio, Aarhus, Denmark).
f. Identification of putative genes in genome contigs
With a large gap read mapper, mRNA sequences were mapped to the assembled genome contigs. The large gap mapper used is based on the standard read mapper of the CLC Genomics Workbench. Maximum number of hits was set to 10 and maximum distance from seed segment to 50 Kb. Large gap read mapping was used for transcript discovery including the following splice sites: exon GT intron AG exon, exon GC intron AG exon, exon GC intron TG exon, exon GC intron AA exon, exon GC intron GG exon, exon GT intron TG exon, exon GT intron AA exon, exon AT intron AC exon, exon AT intron AA exon, exon AT intron AG exon, exon AT intron AT exon, automatic noise filtering and prediction of open reading frames with a minimum length of 100 bases. Large gap read mapping and transcript discovery were performed in CLC Genomics Workbench 7.0.4 (CLCBio, Aarhus, Denmark).
g. Mapping of RNA reads
All mappings were performed in CLC Genomics Workbench 7.0.4 (CLCBio, Aarhus, Denmark).
Quality trimmed reads from RNA sequencing were mapped against the assembled contigs from genome sequencing, which thus served as reference. The same mismatch and insertion/deletion costs were used as for the assembly. Mapping criteria were set to a length fraction of 0.5 and a similarity fraction of 0.8.
In a blastn based alignment approach, transcriptomic contig sequences were mapped against publicly available contigs from a mixed I. ricinus salivary gland and partially fed midgut assembly with match/mismatch cost of 2/3 and gap costs of 5/2 (existence/extension). The word size was set to 11 and the expectation value to 10.
h. Annotation of transcriptome contigs
Assembled transcriptome contigs were annotated via the Blast2GO software plugin (Genomics of Gene Expression, Valencia, Spain) for CLC Workbench 7.0.4 (CLCBio, Aarhus, Denmark).
In brief, sequences were blasted locally by blastx against the NCBI Arthropoda protein database (date of database: 04/14/2014) and Gene Ontology (GO) IDs were mapped. Out of the mapped GO IDs, those that passed an annotation cut-off of 55 for the lowest term per branch and a GO-weight of at least 5 were annotated to the contigs. In addition, annotation was restricted to Blast hits passing an evidence filter of a minimum e-value of 1xe−6 and a similarity of at least 30 % throughout the alignment length.
In a second approach, assembled transcriptome contig sequences were analyzed with InterProScan (default parameters). InterProScan uses several prediction algorithms and combines their individual results. Protein family membership prediction and presence of functional domains and sites are combined to profile protein sequences. The results of both annotation approaches, based on alignment by blast and motif search by InterProScan, were merged.
A second GO layer was inserted that linked and, whenever necessary, corrected annotations for molecular function with annotations for biological processes, the mRNA sequences are involved in, and annotations for cellular components, they are active in, by performing ANNEX analysis. Finally, GO-Slim algorithm was run to summarize GO annotations to a general functional scheme. The transcriptome annotation pipeline is illustrated in Additional file 11.
i. Visualization of transcriptome contig annotation
In order to visualize the distribution of GO terms annotated to transcriptome contigs, direct acyclic graphs (DAG) for molecular function, biological process and cellular component were built for the annotated sequences with the Blast2GO software plugin (Genomics of Gene Expression, Valencia, Spain) for CLC Workbench 7.0.4 (CLCBio, Aarhus, Denmark). Since the annotation results of all sequences were joined within the same DAG, it was called combined DAG. A node score filter of 12.0 and a sequence filter of 10 was set. The combined DAGs for the GO categories “molecular function”, “biological process” and “cellular component” are shown in Additional file 12. Out of the combined DAGs, pie charts were created with a sequence filter of 50 for the multilevel charts and 1 for the level charts.
Proteomics
a. Protein extraction
One hundred twenty dissected midguts were pooled for protein extraction. As no technical replicates could be performed due to cost restraints, we cannot exclude that sample preparation and/or the detection/analysis workflow may skew the results, representing a partial limitation of the study. However, the biological variation has been reduced by pooling individuals for protein extraction and mass spectrometry analysis. The midguts were pelleted by centrifugation at 3,000 g for 5 min at 4 °C and washed in phosphate buffered saline (1.37 M NaCl, 27 mM KCl, 100 mM Na2HPO4, 18 mM KH2PO4). 1 mL lysis buffer (30 mM Tris-Cl, 7 M Urea, 2 M Thiourea, 4 % CHAPS, pH 8.5) supplemented with protease inhibitor (Pierce protease Inhibitor Tablets, Thermo Fisher Scientific Inc., Waltham, MA, USA) was added and suspension homogenized with a dounce potter. The homogenate was incubated on ice for 30 min on a rocket shaker and centrifuged at 15,000 g for 20 min at 4 °C. Proteins in the supernatant were quantified with the 660 nm Protein Assay (Thermo Fisher Scientific Inc., Waltham, MA, USA) and precipitated by chloroform/methanol using 4 volumes of 100 % methanol, 1 volume of chloroform and 3 volumes of double-distilled water and centrifuged at 5,000 g for 5 min. The aqueous layer was removed and 4 volumes of 100 % methanol added. After centrifugation at 14,000 g for 30 min, any liquid was removed and the pellet was air-dried before being resuspended to a final concentration of 5 mg/mL in lysis buffer.
b. 2D-GE-MS/MS
Extracted proteins were labeled with CyDye2 (GE Healthcare Ltd, Chalfont St Giles, GB) according to the manufacturer’s protocol. Isoelectric focusing was done on a 24 cm ImmobilineDryStrip, pH 3-10 nonlinear (Pharmacia Biotech, Uppsala, Sweden) in an Ettan™ IPGphor3 (GE Healthcare Ltd, Chalfont St Giles, GB) with a maximum of 10,000 V and a total of 110,500 Vh. The second dimension separation was performed on a 12.5 % (v/v) ExcelGel polyacrylamide gel in an EttanDALTsix electrophoresis unit (GE Healthcare Ltd, Chalfont St Giles, GB). The gel was scanned with a Typhoon FLA 9500 (GE Healthcare Ltd, Chalfont St Giles, UK) and pick lists were generated with Delta2D software (V4.2, Decodon GmbH, Greifswald, Germany). Selected spots were picked with an Ettan Spot Picker (GE Healthcare Ltd, Chalfont St Giles, GB). The picked proteins were washed twice in 50 mM Ammonium bicarbonate in 50 % Methanol (v/v), dehydrated in 75 % acetonitrile (ACN, v/v) and then dried. Trypsin digestion (Trypsin Gold, Promega, Madison, WI, USA, 5 μl/mL in 20 mM ammonium bicarbonate, incubation for 6 h at 37 °C), peptide extraction (50 % ACN (v/v)/0.1 % trifluoroacetic acid (v/v), incubation for 20 min at 37 °C) and spotting was done with an EVO 2 (Tecan, Maennedorf, Switzerland). Combined peptide mass fingerprinting (PMF) and tandem mass spectrometry (MS/MS) was done by matrix-assisted laser desorption/ionization – time of flight/time of flight (MALDI-TOF/TOF) on an AB SCIEX TOF/TOF 5800 system (AB Sciex, Framingham, MA, USA) using reflector mode.
c. Annotation of protein spots
Per analyzed spot, the PMF and a maximum of 10 MS/MS spectra were used for protein identification by Mascot search (V2.3, Matrix Science Ltd, London, UK) against the NCBInr database limited to the taxonomy of Arthropoda (2,341,519 sequences, download date 08/05/2014) and assembled mRNA sequences from I. ricinus midgut transcriptome sequencing (364,158 sequences). Peptide mass tolerance was set to ± 100 ppm, fragment mass tolerance to ± 0.5 Da with a maximum of two missed cleavages. As variable modifications, oxidation of histidine, tryptophan or methionine, dioxidation of tryptophan and tryptophan to kynurenin modification were allowed, fixed modification was set for carbamidomethylation of cysteine. The significance threshold (p < 0.05) was calculated automatically by Mascot for a score minimum of 76 for MS and 50 for MS/MS for searches against the Arthropoda database and 68 for MS and 41 for MS/MS for searches against the in-house transcriptome database. The score is dependent on several factors, including in particular also the number of entries in the database, against which the spectra are searched. Since the number of entries in our in-house database was lower than the number in the public Arthropoda database, a lower score was required to reach the significance threshold of p < 0.05. In order to set the same significance threshold for both searches, the score threshold was adjusted to the size of the database. Additionally, a false discovery rate analysis was performed on the search results. Therefore, a concatenated target-decoy database was created for the in-house transcriptome as well as the public Arthropoda database, with decoy hits created by randomizing the target sequences. Searches were repeated against both of these databases. The highest scoring hit and the cumulative FDR for each spot are presented in Additional file 13. Comparing the protein scores at 1 % FDR (70 for the transcriptome and 67 for the Arthropoda database) to the protein scores at a p-value of 0.05 (72 and 80, respectively), the p < 0.05 threshold was stricter than the 1 % FDR threshold. Therefore, this threshold was applied to categorize the search results as significant or not significant. Based on the Mascot results and annotation on the gel, spectra were checked in addition manually.
Data access
Public disclosure of genomic sequences and transcriptomic sequences are provided on NCBI. The Whole Genome Shotgun project has been deposited at DDBJ/EMBL/GenBank under the accession JXMZ00000000. The version described in this paper is version JXMZ01000000. The raw sequence reads have been deposited under the accession SRP051465 in the Sequence Read Archive.
The Transcriptome Shotgun Assembly project has been deposited at DDBJ/EMBL/GenBank under the accession GCJO00000000. The version described in this paper is the first version, GCJO01000000. The raw sequence reads have been deposited under the accession SRP051469 in the Sequence Read Archive.
The mass spectrometry proteomics data have been deposited to the ProteomeXchange Consortium via the PRIDE partner repository with the dataset identifier PXD001796 and 10.6019/PXD001796.
Additional files