ABSTRACT:
Abstract
To understand the impact of alternative translation initiation on a proteome, we performed a proteome‐wide study on protein turnover using positional proteomics and ribosome profiling to distinguish between N‐terminal proteoforms of individual genes. By combining pulsed SILAC with N‐terminal COFRADIC, we monitored the stability of 1,941 human N‐terminal proteoforms, including 147 N‐terminal proteoform pairs that originate from alternative translation initiation, alternative splicing or incomplete processing of the initiator methionine. N‐terminally truncated proteoforms were less abundant than canonical proteoforms and often displayed altered stabilities, likely attributed to individual protein characteristics, including intrinsic disorder, but independent of N‐terminal amino acid identity or truncation length. We discovered that the removal of initiator methionine by methionine aminopeptidases reduced the stability of processed proteoforms, while susceptibility for N‐terminal acetylation did not seem to influence protein turnover rates. Taken together, our findings reveal differences in protein stability between N‐terminal proteoforms and point to a role for alternative translation initiation and co‐translational initiator methionine removal, next to alternative splicing, in the overall regulation of proteome homeostasis.
METHODS:
Materials and Methods
Cell culture
For N‐terminal COFRADIC analyses, human Jurkat T‐lymphocytes (clone E6‐1 ATCC TIB‐152, ATCC) were subjected to SILAC labelling (Ong et al, 2002). Cells were cultured in a 5% CO2 gas‐equilibrated, humidified incubator in Roswell Park Memorial Institute (RPMI)—1640 medium without arginine and lysine (Silantes, GmbH, Munich, Germany) containing 10% fetal bovine serum dialysed using a 10‐kDa cut‐off membrane (Gibco, Life Technologies, Paisley, Scotland, UK), 2 mM alanyl‐L‐glutamine dipeptide (GlutaMAX, Gibco), 50 units/ml of penicillin (Gibco), 50 μg/ml of streptomycin (Gibco) and 146 μg/ml light (12C6) L‐lysine (Cambridge Isotope Labs, Andover, MA, USA). Media were supplemented with either light (Arg0, 12C6 14N4) or medium (Arg6, 13C6 14N4) L‐arginine (Cambridge Isotope Labs) at a final concentration of 48 μg/ml at which Arg to Pro conversion was not detected. To achieve a complete incorporation of the labelled amino acids, cells were maintained in culture for seven population doublings (Fig EV5).
The pulsed SILAC strategy for protein turnover measurements was previously described by Boisvert et al (2012). Briefly, suspension cultures containing equal numbers of unlabelled (Arg0) and labelled (Arg6) cells were taken and the medium was removed by centrifugation for 5 min at 350 g. Cell pellets were washed with PBS and centrifuged for 5 min at 350 g. The unlabelled cells were then suspended in light RPMI medium, whereas the medium labelled (Arg6) cells were suspended in medium containing heavy Arg (Arg10, 13C6 15N4) l‐arginine. Following medium change, separate starting cultures of 107 cells were cultured at a concentration of 2 × 105 cells/ml for periods of 0.5, 1.5, 4, 8, 12, 24 or 48 h, after which cultures of 107 cells were collected by centrifugation. Following two rounds of re‐suspending in PBS and centrifugation at room temperature, cell pellets were immediately frozen on dry ice and stored at −80°C.
Proteins were isolated from cell pellets by three rounds of freezing and thawing in 1 ml of 50 mM sodium phosphate buffer, pH 7.5, and cell debris was removed by a 10‐min centrifugation at 13,200 g at 4°C. The protein concentration in the supernatants was measured by the Bradford method, and for every time point sample, an equal amount of medium/heavy labelled proteome sample was mixed with the corresponding equivalent of light control sample.
Cycloheximide pulse‐chase experiments
100 μg/ml cycloheximide was added to Jurkat cells that were cultured at a density of 180,000 cells/ml. A total of 3.46 × 106 cells were harvested after 0, 0.5, 1.5, 4, 8, 12 or 24 h of treatment and pelleted for 3 min at 800 g. Cells were lysed in 100 μl of RIPA buffer (50 mM Tris–HCl pH 8.0, 150 mM NaCl, 1% NP‐40) with protease inhibitors added (Roche). All lysates were flash‐frozen and stored at −80°C until further processing. Samples were thawed and centrifuged for 10 min at 13,200 g, followed by measurement of protein content using the Bradford method. Forty micrograms of protein material from each sample was separated by SDS–PAGE (4–12% Criterion Bis‐Tris gel, Bio‐Rad), and protein levels were monitored by Western blotting. The following antibodies were used: anti‐lamin B (NA12, Calbiochem), anti‐securin (ab3305, Abcam), anti‐β‐catenin (C2206, Sigma), anti‐SYF2 (ab3610, Abcam), anti‐GAPDH (ab9484, Abcam), anti‐actin (A2066, Sigma) and anti‐α‐tubulin (T5168, Sigma). The intensity of bands was assessed using the LICOR Odyssey software for Western Blot image processing.
To validate the proteomics‐derived differential protein turnover of dbTIS and aTIS proteoforms of MARE2 and AN32E, complete cDNA clones were obtained from the ORFeome 7.1 collection (ID 4499) and I.M.A.G.E. (ID 3047915), respectively. Site‐directed mutagenesis (Stratagene, Agilent Technologies) by mutating ATG (Met) to TTG (Leu) codons was performed to analyse the expression of selected proteoforms. (Mutagenised) constructs were subcloned into the eukaryotic pEF‐DEST51 expression vector (Gateway, Life Technologies) and transfected in HCT116 cells using Fugene HD (Promega) at a 0.8/3/150,000 ratio of DNA [μg], Fugene HD [μl] and number of cells. Cycloheximide pulse‐chase experiments were performed as described above for Jurkat cells, except that 150,000 HCT116 cells were harvested for every overexpressed construct and time point analysed. Cells were lysed in 80 μl RIPA buffer, and about 10 μg of total protein material was separated by SDS–PAGE. Degradation of overexpressed proteoforms was monitored by Western blotting using the anti‐V5 antibody (R96025, Life Technologies) and compared to the turnover of stable proteins such as actin (Schwanhausser et al, 2011).
N‐terminal COFRADIC
The combined proteome mixtures were analysed by N‐terminal COFRADIC (Staes et al, 2011; Van Damme et al, 2011). In summary, proteins are first blocked at their N‐ends (α‐amines) and lysines (ε‐amines) by acetylation. After trypsin digestion, terminal peptides are enriched for by means of SCX at low pH and by applying two consecutive RP‐HPLC separations. In the latter, any remaining internal peptides and C‐terminal peptides are shifted by reaction of their free α‐amino groups (new free α‐amino groups introduced by the action of trypsin) with 2,4,6‐trinitrobenzenesulphonic acid (TNBS), thereby allowing for their segregation from N‐terminal peptides. Fractions enriched for N‐terminal peptides are subsequently analysed by means of LC‐MS/MS. All steps of the N‐terminal COFRADIC analysis, including SCX enrichment, were performed as described (Staes et al, 2011). More specifically, solid guanidinium hydrochloride (Gu.HCl) was added to the proteome mixtures to a final concentration of 4 M in order to denature all proteins. Next, proteins were reduced and alkylated using TCEP and iodoacetamide, respectively. Upon desalting of the S‐alkylated samples in 50 mM sodium phosphate (pH 8.0), primary free amines were N‐acetylated (no distinction between can be made between in vivo Nt‐free (and thus in vitro Nt‐acetylated) and in vivo Nt‐acetylated N‐termini by adding sulfo‐N‐hydroxysuccinimide (NHS) acetate (Pierce). Twice the molar excess of glycine over the NHS ester was subsequently added to quench any non‐reacted NHS‐acetate. Possible O‐acetylation of Ser, Thr or Tyr residues was reverted by adding hydroxylamine (Fluka) to the modified protein mixtures. A final desalting step was performed in protein digestion buffer (10 mM ammonium bicarbonate, pH 7.9), and the proteomes were digested overnight at 37°C with sequencing‐grade, modified trypsin (Promega, Madison, WI, USA) (enzyme/substrate of 1/100, w/w). Subsequent steps of the N‐terminal COFRADIC analysis, including SCX enrichment, were performed as described (Stes et al, 2014).
Following label swapping, one N‐terminal COFRADIC analysis was performed per time point (7 N‐terminal COFRADIC analysis in total). During the primary RP‐HPLC separation of the actual N‐terminal COFRADIC procedure, peptides were collected in 13 fractions of 4 min each. Next, 12 secondary fractions were collected per primary fraction and pooled as described in Staes et al (2011), overall resulting in 36 samples for LC‐MS/MS analysis per N‐terminal COFRADIC set‐up.
LC‐MS/MS analysis
LC‐MS/MS analysis was performed using an Ultimate 3000 RSLC nano HPLC (Dionex, Amsterdam, the Netherlands) in‐line connected to an LTQ Orbitrap Velos mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Bremen, Germany). The sample mixture was loaded on a trapping column (made in‐house, 100 μm I.D. × 20 mm, 5‐μm beads C18 Reprosil‐HD, Dr. Maisch). After back flushing from the trapping column, the sample was loaded on a reverse‐phase column (made in‐house, 75 μm I.D. × 150 mm, 5‐μm beads C18 Reprosil‐HD, Dr. Maisch). Peptides were loaded in solvent A’ (0.1% trifluoroacetic acid, 2% acetonitrile (ACN)) and separated with a linear gradient from 2% solvent A’’ (0.1% formic acid) to 50% solvent B’ (0.1% formic acid and 80% ACN) at a flow rate of 300 nl/min followed by a wash reaching 100% solvent B’. The mass spectrometer was operated in data‐dependent mode, automatically switching between MS and MS/MS acquisition for the ten most abundant peaks in a given MS spectrum. Full‐scan MS spectra were acquired in the Orbitrap at a target value of 1E6 with a resolution of 60,000. The 10 most intense ions were then isolated for fragmentation in the linear ion trap, with a dynamic exclusion of 20 s. Peptides were fragmented after filling the ion trap at a target value of 1E4 ion counts. Mascot Generic Files were created from the MS/MS data in each LC run using the Mascot Distiller software (version 2.4.2.0, Matrix Science, www.matrixscience.com/Distiller.html). To generate these MS/MS peak lists, grouping of spectra was allowed with a maximum intermediate retention time of 30 s and a maximum intermediate scan count of 5. Grouping was done with a 0.005 Da precursor tolerance. A peak list was only generated when the MS/MS spectrum contained more than 10 peaks. There was no de‐isotoping and the relative signal‐to‐noise limit was set at 2.
The generated MS/MS peak lists were searched with Mascot using the Mascot Daemon interface (version 2.3.01, Matrix Science). Searches were performed in the Swiss‐Prot database with taxonomy set to human (UniProtKB/Swiss‐Prot database version 2011_08, containing 20,244 human protein entries). The Mascot search parameters were set as follows: acetylation at lysine side chains, carbamidomethylation of cysteine and methionine oxidation to methionine‐sulfoxide were set as fixed modifications. Variable modifications were acetylation of N‐termini and pyroglutamate formation of N‐terminal glutamine (both at peptide level). Endoproteinase semi‐Arg‐C/P (semi‐Arg‐C specificity with Arg‐Pro cleavage allowed) was set as enzyme allowing for no missed cleavages. Mass tolerance was set to 10 ppm on the precursor ion and to 0.5 Da on fragment ions. Peptide charge was set to 1+, 2+, 3+ and instrument setting was put to ESI‐TRAP. Only peptides that scored above the threshold score, set at 99% confidence, were withheld. The FDR was estimated by searching a decoy database (a shuffled version of the human Swiss‐Prot database version 2011_08) and ranged from 0.32% to 2.27% for individual samples, with a global FDR of 1.18% on the spectrum level.
Ribosome profiling
For ribosome profiling, Jurkat cells were grown in RPMI medium (Gibco) supplemented with 10% fetal bovine serum, 2 mM alanyl‐l‐glutamine dipeptide (GlutaMAX, Gibco), 50 units/ml penicillin and 50 μg/ml streptomycin at 37°C and 5% CO2. Cultures were treated with 50 μM lactimidomycin (LTM) (Ju et al, 2005; Schneider‐Poetsch et al, 2010) or 100 μg/ml cycloheximide (CHX) (Sigma, USA) for 30 min at 37°C before cell harvest. Subsequently, cells were collected by centrifugation (5 min at 300 g), rinsed with ice‐cold PBS and recovered again by centrifugation in the presence of CHX. 108 cells were re‐suspended in 1 ml ice‐cold lysis buffer [10 mM Tris–HCl, pH 7.4, 5 mM MgCl2, 100 mM KCl, 1% Triton X‐100, 2 mM dithiothreitol (DTT), 100 μg/ml CHX, 1× complete and EDTA‐free protease inhibitor cocktail (Roche)] (Guo et al, 2010). Following 10 min of incubation on ice, samples were passed through QIAshredder spin columns (Qiagen). The flow‐through was clarified by centrifugation for 10 min at 16,000 × g and 4°C. Six hundred microlitres of the recovered supernatant was subjected to RNase I (Life Technologies) digestion using 1000 U of enzyme. Digestion of polysomes proceeded for 55 min at room temperature and was stopped with SUPERase.In RNase Inhibitor (Life Technologies). Next, monosomes were recovered by ultracentrifugation at 75,000 rpm in a cooled TLA‐120.2 rotor over a 1 M sucrose cushion in 20 mM HEPES‐KOH pH 7.4, 5 mM MgCl2, 100 mM KCl, 2 mM DTT, 100 μg/ml CHX and 100 U/ml Superase.In. Subsequent steps were performed as described by Ingolia et al (2011) with some minor adjustments. RNA was extracted from the samples using a heated acid phenol– chloroform– isoamyl alcohol (125:24:1) procedure. Seventeen micrograms of RNA was subjected to electrophoresis under denaturing conditions in 15% TBE‐Urea polyacrylamide gel (Life Technologies). Ribosome‐protected fragments (RPFs) of 28–34 nucleotides were extracted from the gel in RNase‐free water for 10 min at 70°C and precipitated with 1/10 volume of 3 M sodium acetate pH 5.2, 1.5 μl GlycoBlue (Life Technologies) and 1 volume of isopropanol overnight at −80°C. Following a dephosphorylation reaction (end‐repair) with 10 U of T4 polynucleotide kinase (New England Biolabs), the RPFs were depleted of ribosomal RNA contaminants using the Ribo‐Zero Magnetic Gold Kit (Illumina) according to the manufacturer's protocol. Subsequently, fragments were ligated to a 1.5 μg of Universal cloning linker using 200 U of T4 RNA ligase II (both New England Biolabs). The ligated product was size‐selected using denaturing gel electrophoresis and purified from gel as described above. Subsequently, reverse transcription (RT) was performed with 200 U of SuperScript III (Life Technologies) according to Ingolia et al (2011), followed by a size selection of the RT product (described above). Next, samples were subjected to circular ligation using 100 U of CircLigase (Illumina) and amplified by PCR using Phusion polymerase (New England Biolabs) for 12 cycles of denaturation (10 s at 98°C), annealing (10 s of 65°C) and elongation (5 s at 72°C) using primer pairs compatible with the Illumina sequencing platform (Ingolia et al, 2011). The resulting ribosome profiling libraries of LTM‐ and CHX‐treated Jurkat cells were sequenced on a NextSeq 500 instrument (Illumina) to yield 75‐bp single‐end reads.
Measurement of proteoform turnover
Arg‐ending N‐terminal peptides were selected that started at position 1 or 2 (entries stored in the Swiss‐Prot database) or derived from alternative translation initiation at positions > 2) and which complied with rules of iMet processing and Nt‐acetylation (Van Damme et al, 2014). For every unique N‐terminus (unique proteoform), SILAC ratios (M/L, H/L and H/M) calculated for the highest scoring peptide identification were included in the analysis. M/L and H/L ratios were normalised, according to equation (1): where L, M and H denote light, medium and heavy isotope‐labelled peptide intensities.
M/L and H/L ratios were plotted in function of time as degradation and synthesis curves, respectively. The crossing over point between the two curves corresponds to 50% protein turnover, see Equation (2):  
Fifty per cent protein turnover was calculated as the crossing point between protein degradation and synthesis curves for proteoforms quantified in at least three time points. We assumed that protein degradation follows a first‐order process. Therefore, an exponential curve with one parameter (B) was fitted to M/L data using the R software (version 0.98.739) and the turnover time was calculated as follows: where k deg is the protein degradation constant; t cc, cell doubling time; and t turn, turnover time.
Alternatively, the turnover time was approximated from linear equations between two M/L and two H/L points lying on opposite sides of the crossing point. We observed a very high correlation between the exponential and the linear method (Pearson coefficient of 0.98). Exponential curve fitting was used for protein turnover determination if the quality of fit determined by the coefficient of determination (R 2) was at least 0.8. In other cases, turnover time was calculated from the linear approximation, provided a descending trend of M/L changes in time was observed. Turnover measurements fulfilling criteria described above were regarded as valid, while other turnover rates remained unassigned and were excluded from analysis. Protein degradation constants were derived from the parameter B (Equation (3)) of individual M/L profiles, and protein half‐lives (t 1/2) were calculated accordingly to equation (4):  
Due to the constrains of equations (3) and (4), negative values of k deg were disregarded and protein half‐lives estimated to be infinite due to continuous cell divisions: t 1/2 ≫ t cc → t 1/2 ≈ ∞.
Quantification of proteoform abundance
Per unique proteoform, spectral counts were averaged among all time points whenever identified (using an arithmetical mean). Normalised spectral abundance factor (NSAF) values (Paoletti et al, 2006) were calculated based on amino acid lengths of individual proteoforms. All proteoforms identified in at least one time point were taken as the complete data set (Table EV1A).
Analysis of ribosome profiling data
Ribosome profiling (Ribo‐Seq) performed in Jurkat cells treated with CHX to study translation elongation and LTM to study translation initiation were analysed using the PROTEOFORMER pipeline (Crappe et al, 2015). PROTEOFORMER was used to perform the quality control, mapping onto a reference genome, identification of TIS and generation of a protein database.
The 3′ adapter sequences were clipped using the fastx_clipper, and reads shorter than 26 or longer than 34 nucleotides were discarded for the Ribo‐Seq‐based TIS calling. The reads were first mapped onto small nuclear RNA, tRNA and rRNA sequences to eliminate contaminating reads. The remaining reads were subsequently mapped onto the human GRCh37 reference genome (Ensembl annotation bundle 75) allowing for a maximum of two mismatches along the entire read. Reads mapping to a maximum of 16 locations on the genome were allowed and retained for every loci. All mapping steps were performed using STAR 2.4.0i. RPF alignments were reduced to a specific position (the P‐site nucleotide) using an offset from the 5′ end of the alignment based on the read length (+12, +13 and +14, respectively, for alignment of ≤ 30 bases long, 31–33 bases long and ≥ 34 bases long). Translation start sites were identified by setting different parameter values for the different TIS categories in the tool. A TIS was called at the Ensembl‐annotated start site if (i) it had a minimum read count of 5; (ii) the position was a local maximum within a 7‐nucleotide window (one codon upstream and one codon downstream); (iii) the difference between the LTM (foreground) and CHX (background) normalised ratio (RLTM‐CHX) within the window reached at least 0.01. A TIS was called within the coding region of a transcript (downstream of annotated start sites) if it had a minimum read count of 15 and RLTM‐CHX of 0.15. For TIS located at the 5′UTR, 3′UTR and other non‐protein‐coding transcripts, the minimum read count was set to 10 with a RLTM‐CHX of 0.05.
We used the above settings to define translation initiation events in Jurkat cells. Taking into consideration every annotated transcript splice variant, all possible ORFs starting at the detected TIS sites were in silico translated. The N‐terminal peptides identified in our pSILAC experiment (N = 2,578) were mapped onto the Ribo‐Seq‐derived protein sequences allowing to associate peptides with ORFs and their corresponding transcripts.
Analysis of translation initiation and splicing
To study the contribution of splicing and (alternative) translation initiation to N‐terminal proteoform expression, we mapped the N‐terminal peptides identified in our proteomics experiment onto the human Swiss‐Prot Isoform, UniProt TrEMBL, Ensembl human protein sequences next the Ribo‐Seq data from Jurkat cells. Further, a comparison was made with Ribo‐Seq data obtained from another human cell line (HCT116 colorectal cancer cells, unpublished data).
In case of Ribo‐Seq matching evidence, a peptide corresponding to position 1 was assumed to be generated via translation initiation. A peptide mapping at position 2 was considered a TIS only if the first methionine was preceded by an alanine, cysteine, glycine, proline, threonine or valine and therefore likely co‐translationally processed. We used the Jurkat data as reference (i) to retrieve RLTM‐CHX values for called TIS sites; (ii) to associate transcripts with a normalised RPF read count (the normalised read count was calculated by summing all the reads that map across the transcript and dividing by its length) and iii) to determine their exon coverage. Since an N‐terminal peptide might map to multiple transcripts, additional information regarding the expression was provided for every matching transcript to allow for a discrimination of transcripts poorly supported by the Ribo‐Seq data.
We further investigated whether a downstream peptide is pointing to a possible annotated splicing or alternative translation event by checking whether this peptide matched the N‐terminal protein sequence previously reported in the protein databases: Ensembl, Swiss‐Prot Isoform or UniProt TrEMBL protein sequences. A peptide was considered as a possible N‐terminus of a splice variant if it mapped at position 1 or 2 to a given sequence in Ensembl or Swiss‐Prot Isoform databases. Further, we qualified the Ensembl‐derived evidence of splicing as either poor (less likely) or good (likely) splicing events. A downstream peptide was considered to be supported by a likely splicing event if any of the Ensembl protein sequences associated with the peptide had a transcript support level less than or equal to three (with one being the highest rank). If none of the protein sequences associated with the peptide had a transcript support level less than three, it was considered as a poorly supported splicing event or not applicable if there was no transcript support level assigned to any of the valid transcripts. For N‐terminal peptides matching an N‐terminus of a Swiss‐Prot Isoform sequence, we further retrieved the information if this protein isoform is generated via splicing or alternative translation initiation. The above‐mentioned data are presented in Table EV1C.
Analysis of proteoform turnover rates in macromolecular complexes
To investigate the dynamic properties of macromolecular complex substituents, protein turnover times were mapped to members of human protein complexes defined by the CORUM database (core set of 1,343 human complexes, Ruepp et al, 2008). Only Swiss‐Prot‐annotated proteoforms (dbTIS) with the most plausible iMet processing status (Van Damme et al, 2011) and high‐quality turnover measurement were considered (Arnesen et al, 2009; Van Damme et al, 2011). Absolute differences in turnover were calculated pairwise between all members of a complex. Subsequently, one‐sided Mann–Whitney U‐test at a 95% confidence interval (R, wilcoxon.test, stats package) was applied to detect proteins with significantly higher absolute differences than the remaining members of a complex.
Gene ontology enrichment analysis
Swiss‐Prot accessions of the 1,894 proteoforms with high‐quality measurement of stability of one representative N‐terminal proteoform were ranked based on their corresponding turnover values. Subsequently, an enrichment analysis of GO terms was performed using GOrilla (http://cbl-gorilla.cs.technion.ac.il/; Eden et al, 2009) using the “single ranked list of genes” option. Duplicate accessions were removed keeping the highest ranking instance per accession. The enrichment P‐values were computed using mHG (minimal Hyper Geometric) statistics and corrected for multiple testing using the Benjamini and Hochberg method giving the FDR q‐values. GO terms enriched in stable or unstable proteins with FDR q‐values ≤ 0.05 were subsequently summarised using REViGO (Supek et al, 2011). Redundant GO terms were removed and the remaining terms visualised in bar charts according to their significance (−log10(q‐value)). Analogously, we performed an enrichment analysis of GO terms in aTIS vs. dbTIS proteoforms using the GOrilla “target and background” option.
Prediction of protein intrinsic disorder
Canonical protein sequences identified in at least three time points (1,972 proteoforms) were retrieved and adjusted to start at the initiating residue of the N‐terminal peptide identified. Of these proteoforms, the percentage of intrinsically disorder was predicted using RAPID (http://biomine-ws.ece.ualberta.ca/RAPID/index.php; Yan et al, 2013) which implements the IUPred algorithms (Dosztanyi et al, 2005a,b).
Hydropathy of protein N‐termini
The grand average of hydropathy (GRAVY) was calculated for the 2‐ and 10‐amino acid‐long N‐terminal sequence of every proteoform (1,894 proteoforms) at http://www.gravy-calculator.de/. Increasing positive score indicated greater hydrophobicity. The calculation was based on the sum of hydropathy values of amino acids in Kyte–Doolittle scale (Kyte & Doolittle, 1982), divided by the number of residues. Correlation between GRAVY values and turnover times was estimated using Pearson and Spearman correlation coefficients.
Statistical analysis of turnover, abundance and disorder of aTIS versus dbTIS
Differences in turnover, abundance and disorder values between aTIS and dbTIS groups were measured for paired dbTIS‐aTIS data using a Wilcoxon signed‐rank one‐sided test for paired samples (R, stats package) and independently between the whole aTIS and dbTIS groups using a Kruskal–Wallis test for difference in distribution (R, stats package), multiple comparison test after Kruskal–Wallis (R, pgirmess package) and Mann–Whitney one‐sided test for independent samples. All analyses were performed in R at P ≤ 0.05 significance.
Category enrichment analysis in turnover, disorder and abundance data
1D enrichment analysis of Pfam, KEGG, GO slim and other categories was performed using the Perseus software (Cox & Mann, 2012) at P ≤ 0.01 significance with a two‐sided test with Benjamini–Hochberg FDR correction. Turnover, disorder and abundance values corresponding to each categorical term were tested for deviations from the complete distribution, and a preference for larger or smaller values was assessed independently for every variable. Correlation of turnover, disorder and abundance values was assessed using Spearman rank correlation.
Relation between protein turnover and N‐terminal amino acid composition
All proteoforms with measured turnover rates (including proteoforms with alternative iMet processing; 1,941 in total) were categorised according to the identity of their utmost N‐terminal residues. Additionally, N‐termini susceptible to iMet processing were further categorised as either Met retaining or Met cleaved. The general impact of N‐terminal residues and iMet processing (categorical variables) on protein turnover was assessed by a Kruskal–Wallis rank sum test (R, stats package). A subsequent multiple comparison test for Kruskal–Wallis (R, pgirmess package) and pairwise Wilcoxon rank sum test (without correction for multiple testing; R, stats package) allowed to indicate the most deviating subgroups (with P < 0.05).
Data availability
MS/MS data was converted using PRIDE Converter (Barsnes et al, 2009) and is available through the PRIDE database (Martens et al, 2005) with the data set identifier PXD002091 and DOI: 10.6019/PXD002091.
Ribo‐Seq sequencing data has been deposited in NCBI's Gene Expression Omnibus (Edgar et al, 2002) and is accessible through GEO Series accession number GSE74279 (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/geo/query/acc.cgi?acc=GSE74279).