ABSTRACT:
Article first published online 19 May 2015.
Background:
The etiology of the inflammatory bowel diseases, including ulcerative colitis (UC), remains incompletely explained. We hypothesized that an analysis of the UC colon proteome could reveal novel insights into the disease etiology.
Methods:
Mucosal colon biopsies were taken by endoscopy from noninflamed tissue of 10 patients with UC and 10 controls. The biopsies were either snap-frozen for protein analysis or prepared for histology. The protein content of the biopsies was characterized by high-throughput gel-free quantitative proteomics, and biopsy histology was analyzed by light microscopy and confocal microscopy.
Results:
We identified and quantified 5711 different proteins with proteomics. The abundance of the proteins calprotectin and lactotransferrin in the tissue correlated with the degree of tissue inflammation as determined by histology. However, fecal calprotectin did not correlate. Forty-six proteins were measured with a statistically significant differences in abundances between the UC colon tissue and controls. Eleven of the proteins with increased abundances in the UC biopsies were associated with neutrophils and neutrophil extracellular traps. The findings were validated by microscopy, where an increased abundance of neutrophils and the presence of neutrophil extracellular traps by extracellular DNA present in the UC colon tissue were confirmed.
Conclusions:
Neutrophils, induced neutrophil extracellular traps, and several proteins that play a part in innate immunity are all increased in abundance in the morphologically normal colon mucosa from patients with UC. The increased abundance of these antimicrobial compounds points to the stimulation of the innate immune system in the etiology of UC.
METHODS:
MATERIALS AND METHODS
Study Cohort
The study cohort size was determined based on a power analysis. Initially, we assumed that approximately 6000 t tests were to be performed in the study with an effect chance of 0.01. Based on this, 10 subjects in each group to be compared yields an estimated power of 95% to detect an effect size of 2.5 when correlating with Benjamini and Hochberg. Therefore, 10 patients with UC for whom endoscopy was planned and 10 healthy subjects were recruited at the outpatients clinic, Diagnostic center Regional Hospital Silkeborg in the period from 2012 to 2013. Diagnosis of UC was based on standard clinical, endoscopic, and histological criteria, and an infectious etiology was excluded. Information on diagnosis, medication, most recent fecal calprotectin measurement, and smoking habits was recorded from the patient records.
Written informed consent was obtained from all participants before participation in the study, and the project was approved by The Regional Scientific Ethical Committee (S-20120204) and the Danish Data Protection Agency (2008-58-035).
Samples Collection
Biopsies for the histological evaluation of disease severity were sampled from descending colon, sigmoid colon, and rectum. Three biopsies were taken from each location. The biopsies were immediately placed on mixed cellulose ester filters (Advantec, Japan), fixed in phosphate-buffered 4% formaldehyde, and stored at room temperature until tissue sample preparation 24 hours later. Colon mucosal biopsies for MS were sampled 40 cm from the anus by sigmoidoscopy. Patient biopsies were taken from macroscopically normal tissue, and all controls had normal findings at sigmoidoscopy. The biopsies were immediately transferred to cryotubes and snap-frozen in liquid nitrogen followed by storage at −140°C until proteomics sample preparation.
Sample Preparation for Histology
The formalin-fixated biopsies were paraffin embedded, sliced in 10 μm, deparaffinized with tissue clear (Sakura, AJ Alphen aan den Rijn, The Netherlands), and stained with hematoxylin and eosin (H&E) (Sigma-Aldrich, St. Louis, MO) or incubated with 2 μM TO-PRO-3 (Thermo Scientific, Waltham, MA) in phosphate-buffered saline for 30 minutes, washed 3 times in phosphate-buffered saline, and mounted.
The H&E-stained slices were investigated with a DM5500B microscopy (Leica Camera, Solms, Germany) equipped with PL Floutar ×16/0.5, and ×40/1.00 objectives and Retiga 2000R CCD Camera (Qimaging, Canada), and the TO-PRO-3 microscopy was performed on a SP5 confocal microscope (Leica Camera) with a PL Floutar ×16/0.5, HCX PL APO ×63/1.40, and HCX PL APO ×100/1.47 objectives. The pictures were processed with ImageJ with the LOCI Tools plugin.
Colon Inflammation Grade Score
As part of the routine patient care at Regional Hospital Silkeborg, pathologists performed histological descriptions of formalin-fixed paraffin-embedded H&E-stained biopsies from descending colon, sigmoid colon, and rectum. The biopsies were characterized and assigned a colon inflammation grade score (0 = no disease activity, 1 = light activity, 2 = moderate activity, and 3 = severe activity) based on the histological descriptions (Table 1). The sum of scores from the descending colon, sigmoid colon, and rectum were squared to yield patient colon inflammation grade scores. The scores were compared with the relative abundance of known inflammatory proteins in the tissue, and Pearson's correlation coefficients were calculated. The histological evaluation was supervised by a specialist in human pathology, blinded for the result of the proteomic analyses.
Sample Preparation for Proteomics
The intestinal biopsies and lysates were kept on ice when possible. Each biopsy was homogenized with steel beads in 0.5 mL of cold lysis buffer (5% sodium deoxycholate, 50 mM triethylammonium bicarbonate, pH 8.5), using intense shaking on a Precellys 24 homogenizer (Berting Technologies, Rockville, MD). The protein concentrations of the lysates were estimated by measuring absorbance at 280 nm (A280) using a NanoDrop 1000 UV-Vis spectrophotometer (Thermo Scientific). To increase the accuracy of the A280 estimations, the concentration of 4 biopsy lysates were determined using a bicinchoninic acid assay with bovine serum albumin as standard, measured using an Infinite microplate reader (Tecan, Männedorf, Switzerland). All A280 measurements were postprocessing calibrated using the bicinchoninic acid assay protein determinations.
Protein digestion was performed using a modified filter-aided sample preparation protocol. A biopsy lysate volume corresponding to 100 μg of total solubilized protein was prepared for LC-MS analysis for each biopsy. Proteins were reduced for 30 minutes at room temperature by adding tris(2-carboxyethyl)phosphine (Thermo Scientific) to a final concentration of 10 mM. The reduced protein solution was transferred to a 30-kDa molecular weight cutoff spin-filter (Millipore, Billerica, MA), and buffer exchange was facilitated between all steps by centrifugation at 15,000g for 15 minutes at 4°C. The proteins were alkylated using 100 μL of 50 mM 2-iodoacetamide (Sigma-Aldrich) in lysis buffer. Two micrograms of sequencing grade modified trypsin (Promega, Madison, WI) dissolved in 50 μL of digestion buffer (0.5% sodium deoxycholate, 50 mM triethylammonium bicarbonate, pH 8.5) was added to the spin-filter, and the proteins were digested to peptides overnight at 37°C. The peptide material was eluted from the spin-filter and purified by phase inversions. One milliliter of ethyl acetate with 1% formic acid was added to the peptide material, the tube was vortexed, centrifuged at 15,000g for 5 minutes to obtain phase separation, and the aqueous phase with peptides was recovered. The final peptide eluent was dried down in a vacuum centrifuge overnight and stored at −80°C until time of analysis.
Proteomics—Analysis
Before LC-MS analysis, the dry peptide product was reconstituted in 20 μL of 2% acetonitrile and 0.1% formic acid. Five micrograms of peptide material as determined by A280 was analyzed per LC-MS analysis. All biopsies were analyzed in triplicates and in a random order of biopsy analysis.
The peptides were analyzed by LC-MS using an UltiMate 3000 UPLC system (Thermo Scientific) coupled online to a Q Exactive mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific) using a trapping column setup. The peptide material was loaded onto a 2-cm trap column packed with Acclaim PepMap100 C18, 5 μm 100 Å material (Thermo Scientific). Subsequently, the peptides were separated using a 50-cm analytical column packed with Acclaim PepMap100 C18, 2 μm 100 Å material (Thermo Scientific). The peptides were eluted from the column with a gradient of 96% solvent A (0.1% formic acid) and 4% solvent B (0.1% formic acid in acetonitrile), which was increased to 8% solvent B on a 5-minute ramp gradient and subsequently to 30% solvent B on a 225-minute ramp gradient, with a constant flow rate of 300 nL/min. The column was washed with 90% solvent B for 10 minutes and equilibrated for 40 minutes, resulting in a total analysis time of 290 minutes per LC-MS analysis. Both columns were kept at 40°C. The eluting peptides were introduced directly into the mass spectrometer by a picotip emitter for nanoflow ionization (New Objective, Woburn, MA). The mass spectrometer was operated in positive mode using a data-dependent acquisition method. A full MS scan in the mass range of m/z 400 to 1200 was acquired at a resolution of 70,000. In each cycle, the mass spectrometer would trigger up to 12 MS/MS acquisitions of eluting ions based on highest signal intensity for fragmentation. The MS/MS scans were acquired with a dynamic mass range at a resolution of 17,500. The precursor ions were isolated using a quadrupole isolation window of 1.6 m/z and fragmented using high-energy collision with a normalized collision energy of 27. Fragmented ions were dynamically added to an exclusion list for 30 seconds.
Proteomics—Raw File Analysis
The measured peptide signal intensities from the full MS scan were integrated using MaxQuant 1.4.1.2 software and used to calculate the relative protein quantities (label-free quantitation). The fragment scans were searched against a Uniprot database containing all reviewed Homo sapiens proteins (downloaded October, 8, 2013, containing 20,277 entries). The following abundant peptide modifications were included in the analysis: carbamidomethylated cysteine residues (fixed), acetylation of N peptides from the N-terminal of proteins (variable), oxidation of methionine (variable), and deamidation of asparginine and glutamine residues (variable).
Proteomics—Protein Data Processing
A target-decoy fragment spectra search strategy was applied and used to adjust the false discovery rate of identified peptides and proteins to below 1% false discovery rate. For quantified proteins, additional filtering of the protein and peptide data was done to ensure high-quality quantitative data: (1) The quantitation of any protein was required to be based on at least 2 sequence-unique quantifiable peptides. (2) The sequence-unique peptides were required to be quantifiable in at least half of the UC biopsies or the control biopsies. (3) All biopsies had been analyzed in triplicates on the LC-MS system. To remove replicate analyses with poor repeatability, all measured protein abundances were log2 transformed and the repeated analyses were investigated individually for the biopsies by scatter plots. Ideally, the repeated analysis of a biopsy should yield identical protein abundances, represented by a Pearson's correlation coefficient of 1 in the scatter plots, indicating a perfect correlation. Individual replicate analyses with a Pearson's correlation less than 0.95 were removed from further analysis, to ensure that only highly reproducible replicates were included in the final data set. (4) To further identify replicate outliers, a principle component analysis (PCA) was performed in Perseus v1.4.1.3. The input for the PCA was all measured protein abundances in all replicates. For the purpose of conducting PCA, missing values (i.e., proteins where a quantitation value was not obtained for a given replicate analysis) were replaced with values from a normal distribution (width 0.3 and down shift 1.8) to simulate signals from low abundant proteins. The grouping of the replicates on the calculated scores plots was investigated. Gene ontology annotations were imported from Uniprot Knowledgebase for all quantified proteins using STRAP v1.5 to classify the proteins.
Proteomics—Statistical Analysis
The repeated measurements of protein abundances were combined in Perseus v1.4.1.3 by taking the median biopsy wise, and the biopsies were grouped according to disease state: 10 biopsies from patients with UC and 10 from controls. To identify proteins with a statistically significant mean abundance change between the UC group and the control group, 2-sided t tests were performed. As several thousand t tests were performed, we applied permutation-based false-positive control to correct for multiple hypothesis testing (parameters: s0 = 1, 250 randomizations). Up to 15% of the statistically significantly changing proteins were allowed to be false positives (i.e., the measured average protein abundance is not statistically significantly different between the UC group and the control group) to ensure sufficient input for the downstream protein functional analysis. Proteins displaying a statistically significant mean abundance change were further investigated using SPSS statistics v22 (IBM, Armonk, NY). The MS data have been deposited to the ProteomeXchange Consortium (http://proteomecentral.proteomexchange.org) by means of the PRIDE partner repository with the data set identifier PXD001608.