ABSTRACT:
Background
In order to get global molecular understanding of one of the most important crop diseases worldwide, we investigated compatible and incompatible interactions between Phytophthora infestans and potato (Solanum tuberosum). We used the two most field-resistant potato clones under Swedish growing conditions, which have the greatest known local diversity of P. infestans populations, and a reference compatible cultivar.
Results
Quantitative label-free proteomics of 51 apoplastic secretome samples (PXD000435) in combination with genome-wide transcript analysis by 42 microarrays (E-MTAB-1515) were used to capture changes in protein abundance and gene expression at 6, 24 and 72 hours after inoculation with P. infestans. To aid mass spectrometry analysis we generated cultivar-specific RNA-seq data (E-MTAB-1712), which increased peptide identifications by 17%. Components induced only during incompatible interactions, which are candidates for hypersensitive response initiation, include a Kunitz-like protease inhibitor, transcription factors and an RCR3-like protein. More secreted proteins had lower abundance in the compatible interaction compared to the incompatible interactions. Based on this observation and because the well-characterized effector-target C14 protease follows this pattern, we suggest 40 putative effector targets.
Conclusions
In summary, over 17000 transcripts and 1000 secreted proteins changed in abundance in at least one time point, illustrating the dynamics of plant responses to a hemibiotroph. Half of the differentially abundant proteins showed a corresponding change at the transcript level. Many putative hypersensitive and effector-target proteins were single representatives of large gene families.
Electronic supplementary material
The online version of this article (doi:10.1186/1471-2164-15-497) contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.
METHODS:
Methods
Plant material and growth conditions
Three potato clones Desiree, Sarpo Mira and SW93-1015 were used. Sarpo Mira and SW93-1015 are two highly resistant potato clones with slightly different resistance reactions. Sarpo Mira is a potato cultivar that recognizes five different effectors from P. infestans  and shows a classical HR reaction in response to P. infestans inoculation. SW93-1015 is a breeding potato clone which is consistently resistant to Swedish P. infestans populations with reduced HR expansion and a weak cpr genotype. Plants were grown in a growth chamber with controlled conditions set at 20°C with a 16:8 light:dark cycle and 70% relative humidity. Five-week-old plants were transferred to an infection chamber with 100% humidity and 10:14 light:dark cycle. After 6 hours, plants were sprayed with an encysted zoospore suspension from P. infestans isolate SE-03058 until the leaf surfaces were fully saturated with the zoospore suspension (15000 sporangia/ml). Relative humidity was maintained at 100% for 2 days after inoculation and then adjusted to 90% for the rest of the experiment. Samples were collected at 6, 24, and 72 hpi. For RNA and apoplastic secretome sampling, fully-expanded upper leaves were collected.
RNA isolation and microarray analysis
Samples were collected from three independent biological experiments. Four to six leaves frozen in liquid nitrogen were homogenized to a fine powder using FastPrep-24 (MP-bio, Santa Ana, USA) with 2 mm beads. Leaf tissue (100 mg) was weighed out and put into RNase-free tubes before extraction. RNA extractions were performed using the RNeasy Plant Mini kit (Qiagen GmbH, Hilden, Germany). Samples were DNase treated and cleaned using the Qiagen RNA cleanup kit. RNA concentration and purity (260/280 nm > 1.8) was checked by a ND-1000 NanoDrop (Wilmington, USA) and integrity of the samples were analyzed with an Experion™ Automated Electrophoresis System (Bio-Rad Laboratories, Hercules, USA). For mRNA expression analysis, a custom-made Agilent expression array (JHI Solanum tuberosum 60 k v1; ArrayExpress accession A-MEXP-2272) based on predicted transcripts of the Solanum tuberosum genome (version 3.4) was used according to the supplier’s directions (One-Color Microarray-Based Gene Expression Analysis Low Input Quick Amp Labeling v. 6.5; Agilent). Data were extracted from each scanned array image using Feature Extraction software (v. 10.7.3; Agilent). The array data is deposited in ArrayExpress: E-MTAB-1515.
Apoplastic secretome sample preparation
Three biological replicates of un-infected control samples were collected. For each apoplast sample, four fully expanded middle leaves from two plants were subjected to independent apoplast isolations. In order to collect un-infected control samples, plants were transferred to the humid chamber and kept in the chamber for 6 hours under the same experimental conditions as for infection experiments. Apoplast isolation was performed by using vacuum infiltration as described. Apoplastic fluids collected from two plants for each sample were pooled, dissolved in 6× SDS-PAGE buffer containing DTT, and denatured at 95°C for 3 minutes. Pooled samples (30 μl of each) were loaded on polyacrylamide gels and separated for 2 cm with SDS-PAGE. After staining with Coomassie, the gel lane from each sample was cut into about 1 mm2 pieces. Each lane was kept separate from this point on, generating five subreplicates for each control sample and four subreplicates for each infected sample. Samples were then subjected to in-gel tryptic digestion with incubation (modified sequencing grade; Promega, Madison, WI, USA) overnight at 37°C. Peptides were extracted in 50–80% acetonitrile and excess acetonitrile was vaporized using centrifugation under vacuum. De-salting was performed using UltraMicro spin columns (Nest group). The whole experiment was repeated twice.
Mass spectrometry
MS analysis was performed on a LTQ Orbitrap XL with an Eksigent nano-LC system (Eksigent technologies, Dublin, CA, USA). A 5 μl sample was injected and separated at a flow rate of 300 nl/min with a 90 minute gradient. The four most intense ions were selected in data-dependent mode for fragmentation in the linear ion trap, for details see. Files were converted to mzML and Mascot Generic Format (MGF) using ProteoWizard and uploaded to the Proteios Software Environment. MGF files were used for MS/MS identification, and mzML files for feature detection. Identification searches were performed in Mascot (http://www.matrixscience.com) and X!Tandem (http://www.thegpm.org/tandem) in a database consisting of all Solanum proteins in UniProt (http://www.uniprot.org), all annotated proteins from the potato genome project (http://www.potatogenome.net,) and predicted proteins from de novo assembled transcripts from three potato clones Desiree, Sarpo Mira and SW93-1015, plus an equally sized decoy part consisting of the reversed protein sequences (in total 670584 proteins). The MS mass tolerance was set to 5 ppm and MS/MS fragment tolerance to 0.5 Da, with one missed cleavage allowed. Cysteine carbamidomethylation was set as fixed and methionine oxidation as variable modification. FDR was subsequently calculated for the combined search results at the peptide-spectrum level, and filtered at a FDR of 1% as described previously. To quantify possible peptides, msInspect feature detection was performed on the mzML files from Proteios using default settings. The features were matched to identifications with a retention time tolerance of 0.2 minutes and an m/z tolerance of 0.005 Da as well as a requirement of same charge and LC-MS/MS run. To facilitate the differential expression analysis and to propagate sequences between the runs, alignment was performed using our recently developed algorithm within Proteios. A report of the peptide features corresponding between runs was exported for further analysis. Peptide data used for further analysis is found in Additional file 6: Table S5 and LC-MS runs are listed in supporting information, Additional file 7: Table S6. The mass spectrometry proteomics data have been deposited to the ProteomeXchange Consortium (http://proteomecentral.proteomexchange.org) via the PRIDE partner repository with the dataset identifier PXD000435 and DOI 10.6019/PXD000435.
Bioinformatics and statistical analysis
RNA-sequencing
We obtained approximately 52 million reads for each potato clone from RNA samples collected at 24 hpi using paired-end libraries from Illumina HiSeq 2000 machines. Clean paired-end reads were then de novo assembled using Trinity (version r2011-11-26) to build transcript contigs. Protein coding sequences from these contigs were extracted by gene prediction program Augustus (version 2.5.5) that was used for constructing a proteomics database. BLASTX was used to obtain annotations from the potato genome. The RNA-seq data has been deposited in ArrayExpress: E-MTAB-1712.
Microarray
Probe intensities were background-corrected and normalized using the quantile method in the Limma R package. Genes with p-values below 0.05 after adjustment with the Benjamini-Hochberg method were regarded as significant. The projected GO annotation (Additional file 8: Table S7) for the differentially expressed probes was then analyzed for enrichment of Gene Ontology (GO) terms using GOEast with default settings (adjusted p-value < 0.1).
Apoplastic secretome
Peptides with a FDR of < 0.01 were selected for further analysis. For normalization, we used the Eigen MS method incorporated in DanteR (v0.2) that uses Eigen values to find trends in the data for normalization. Only peptides that were identified in at least two of the subreplicates of any sample were selected and normalized. In DanteR, data was filtered, missing values imputed and protein level intensities for the leading proteins calculated using Q-Rollup function with 2 to 3 peptides per protein based on median peptide intensities. Proteins with single peptide hits were included for further analysis. Differentially expressed proteins were calculated using one-way ANOVA for all time points from each potato clone with their relative controls. Fold change estimates were performed based on linear model comparison of each time point with the relative control for each potato clone. After Benjamini-Hochberg (BH) p-value adjustment, differentially expressed proteins with adjusted p-value < 0.05 were selected for further analysis. Default settings in STEM were used and. Standalone InterProScan with default settings was used to find conserved domains and peptide fingerprints for apoplastic secretome protein classification. TargetP was used for secretory signal peptide identification. MapMan analysis was performed to explore gene pathways based on sequence identity to Arabidopsis genes.