ABSTRACT:
The degree and the origins of quantitative variability of most human plasma proteins are largely unknown. Because the twin study design provides a natural opportunity to estimate the relative contribution of heritability and environment to different traits in human population, we applied here the highly accurate and reproducible SWATH mass spectrometry technique to quantify 1,904 peptides defining 342 unique plasma proteins in 232 plasma samples collected longitudinally from pairs of monozygotic and dizygotic twins at intervals of 2–7 years, and proportioned the observed total quantitative variability to its root causes, genes, and environmental and longitudinal factors. The data indicate that different proteins show vastly different patterns of abundance variability among humans and that genetic control and longitudinal variation affect protein levels and biological processes to different degrees. The data further strongly suggest that the plasma concentrations of clinical biomarkers need to be calibrated against genetic and temporal factors. Moreover, we identified 13 cis-SNPs significantly influencing the level of specific plasma proteins. These results therefore have immediate implications for the effective design of blood-based biomarker studies.
METHODS:
Materials and Methods
Sample recruitment and collection
A total of 116 twins, comprising 22 DZ and 36 MZ pairs, were ascertained from the Twins UK Adult Twin Registry at King's College London of approximately 11,000 twins (http://www.twinsUK.ac.uk) (Moayyeri et al,) and invited to participate in this study. Eligible twins were healthy, Caucasian females of north European descent and aged between 38 and 78 years. They provided written informed consent. Zygosities were confirmed by genotype. We applied a longitudinal twin strategy to recruit samples. These healthy twins were selected at an average age of 57.8, and the time intervals between two donations range from 678 to 2,718 days, with a mean of 1,910 days (i.e. 5.2 years). This study was approved by St. Thomas' Hospital Research Ethics Committee. The twins have been shown to be generalizable to the general singleton population (Andrew et al,). Fasting blood samples were collected at all visits under identical conditions (all twins fasted overnight for 10 h before the scheduled visits). Plasma was obtained from each sample by centrifuging at 2,000 g for 10 min at room temperature, aliquoted and instantly stored at −80°C. Complete Protease Inhibitor Cocktail (Roche) was added upon thawing. None of the samples were thawed more than twice before analysis.
Sample preparation and protein digestion
Crude plasma samples were centrifuged at 18,400 g for 10 min at 4°C. The following sample preparation steps were performed with 96-well format plates with five whole-process experimental replicates distributed in different plates. 5 μl of plasma from each sample was diluted to 50 μl and filtered by G-10 gel filtration cartridges (Nest Group Inc.). Three external proteins were spiked (bovine alpha-1-acid glycoprotein with the targeted plasma level at 85 μg/ml, bovine fetuin-B at 8.5 μg/ml and human prostate-specific antigen at 0.85 μg/ml) before 80 μl of 10 M urea in 100 mM ammonium bicarbonate was added into each sample for denaturing at 37°C, 30 min. After reduction and alkylation with 10 mM tris(carboxyethyl)phosphine (Sigma-Aldrich) and 20 mM iodoacetamide (Sigma-Aldrich), the samples were diluted to 1 M urea and were digested with sequencing-grade porcine trypsin (Promega) at a protease/protein ratio of 1:50 overnight at 37°C (Huttenhain et al,). Digests were purified with Vydac C18 Silica MicroSpin columns (The Nest Group Inc.). An aliquot of retention time calibration peptides from iRT-Kit (Biognosys) was spiked into each sample at a ratio of 1:30 (v/v) before all LC-MS analysis, to correct relative retention time differences between runs (Escher et al,). Selected, heavy isotope-labeled internal standard peptides according to our previous study were synthesized (Huttenhain et al,) (JPT Peptide Technologies and Thermo Fisher) and spiked into each sample for SRM and SWATH-MS measurements.
Plasma depletion and SAX fractionation
For the comprehensive shotgun analysis, crude plasma mixture from all the samples was firstly depleted of the 14 most abundant proteins with the multiple affinity removal system (MARS Hu-14 spin cartridge; Agilent Technologies) according to the manufacturer's instruction. Depleted samples were exchanged with Vivaspin 500 concentrators with a 5,000 molecular weight cutoff (Sartorius Stedim Biotech), denatured in 6 M urea and then diluted and digested with trypsin as above (Huttenhain et al,). 50 μg of the resulting peptides was then separated into six fractions by strong anion exchanger (SAX) and purified on C18 StageTips as previously described (Wisniewski et al,). The depleted sample was also directly digested and analyzed without SAX fractionation.
Shotgun proteomic measurement
The depleted and fractionated peptides were all measured by an AB Sciex 5600 TripleTOF mass spectrometer operated in data-dependent acquisition (DDA) mode. The mass spectrometer was interfaced with an Eksigent NanoLC Ultra 2D Plus HPLC system as previously described (Gillet et al,; Collins et al,; Liu et al,). Peptides were directly injected onto a 20-cm PicoFrit emitter (New Objective, self-packed to 20 cm with Magic C18 AQ 3-μm 200-Å material) and then separated using a 120-min gradient from 2 to 35% (buffer A 0.1% (v/v) formic acid, 2% (v/v) acetonitrile, buffer B 0.1% (v/v) formic acid, 90% (v/v) acetonitrile) at a flow rate of 300 nl/min. MS1 spectra were collected in the range 360–1,460 m/z. The 20 most intense precursors with charge state 2–5 which exceeded 250 counts per second were selected for fragmentation, and MS2 spectra were collected in the range 50–2,000 m/z for 100 ms. The precursor ions were dynamically excluded from reselection for 20 s.
SWATH-MS measurement
SWATH-MS measurements were performed with peptide mixtures generated by digesting crude plasma samples. The unfractionated, total peptide samples were analyzed to minimize confounding factors introduced by sample handling. The same LC-MS/MS system used for DDA measurements was used for SWATH analysis (Gillet et al,; Collins et al,; Liu et al,). Specifically, in SWATH-MS mode, the instrument was specifically tuned to optimize the quadrupole settings for the selection of 25-m/z wide precursor ion selection windows. Using an isolation width of 26 m/z (containing 1 m/z for the window overlap), a set of 32 overlapping windows was constructed, covering the precursor mass range of 400–1,200 m/z. The effective isolation windows can be considered as being 399.5–424.5, 424.5–449.5, etc. SWATH-MS2 spectra were collected from 100 to 2,000 m/z. The collision energy (CE) was optimized for each window according to the calculation for a charge 2+ ion centered upon the window with a spread of 15 eV. An accumulation time (dwell time) of 100 ms was used for all fragment ion scans in high-sensitivity mode, and for each SWATH-MS cycle, a survey scan in high-resolution mode was also acquired for 100 ms, resulting in a duty cycle of ∽3.4 s. Six repeated SWATH-MS measurements were performed on one of the samples to access the technical variability.
SRM measurement
For SRM analysis, peptide samples were analyzed on a hybrid triple quadrupole/ion trap mass spectrometer (5500QTRAP, AB Sciex) equipped with a nanoelectrospray ion source. Chromatographic separation of peptides was performed by a nanoLC ultra 1Dplus system (Eksigent) coupled to a 15-cm-fused silica emitter. Peptides were separated in a 35-min gradient of 5–35% acetonitrile in 0.1% formic acid (v/v) at a flow rate of 300 nl/min (Huttenhain et al,; Liu et al,). Both Q1 and Q3 operated at unit resolution and a cycle time of 3 s at scheduled mode (4 min window). CEs were calculated according to previous studies (Lange et al,; Liu et al,). SRM data were analyzed using Skyline (MacLean et al,) and normalized based on the external proteins spiked and the heavy peptide standards.
Spectral library generation for SWATH-MS
Profile-mode.wiff files from shotgun data acquisition were centroided and converted to mzML format using the AB Sciex Data Converter v.1.3 and converted to mzXML format using MSConvert v.3.04.238. The MS2 spectra were queried against the reviewed canonical Swiss-Prot complete proteome database for human (Nov. 2012) appended with common contaminants and reversed sequence decoys (Elias & Gygi,) (40,951 protein sequences including decoys). The SEQUEST database search (Yates et al,) through Sorcerer PE version 4.2 included the following criteria: static modifications of 57.02146 Da for cysteines and variable modifications of 15.99491 Da for methionine oxidations. The parent mass tolerance was set to be 50 p.p.m, and mono-isotopic fragment mass tolerance was 0.5 Da (which was further filtered to be < 0.05 Da for building spectral library); semi-tryptic peptides and peptides with up to two missed cleavages were allowed. The identified peptides were processed and analyzed through Trans-Proteomic Pipeline 4.5.2 (TPP) (Keller et al,) and were validated using the PeptideProphet score (Keller et al,). All the peptides were filtered at a false discovery rate (FDR) of 1%. The raw spectral libraries were generated from all valid peptide spectrum matches and then refined into the non-redundant consensus libraries (Collins et al,) using SpectraST (Lam et al,). For each peptide, the retention time was mapped into the iRT space (Escher et al,) with reference to a linear calibration constructed for each shotgun run, as previously described (Collins et al,). The MS assays, constructed from Top six most intense transitions with Q1 range from 400 to 1,200 m/z excluding the precursor SWATH window, were used for targeted data analysis of SWATH maps.
A published high-confidence list of 1,929 human plasma proteins complied from PeptideAtlas (Farrah et al,) was merged with an in-house compendium of MS assays for the targeted detection of any of more than 10,000 human proteins in SWATH-MS datasets (Rosenberger et al,), and correspondingly, the highly specific MS assays of 1,550 plasma proteins were extracted. The spectral library from our shotgun analysis was then combined with the library of these 1,550 proteins at the peptide level, whereas the assays coming from the latter case were only accepted if the corresponding peptides were not identified by our shotgun effort.
Targeted data analysis for SWATH maps
SWATH-MS.wiff files were first converted to profile mzXML using ProteoWizard (Kessner et al,). The whole process of SWATH-targeted data analysis was carried out using OpenSWATH (Rost et al,) running on an internal computing cluster. OpenSWATH utilizes a target-decoy scoring system like mProphet to estimate the identification of FDR (Rost et al,). The best scoring classifier that was built from the sample of most protein identifications was utilized in this study. Based on our final spectral library for human plasma proteome, OpenSWATH firstly identified the peak groups from all individual SWATH maps at a global peptide FDR = 1% (enabled by the strict FDR cutoff of 0.0307% at the level of total peak groups) and aligned them between SWATH maps based on the clustering behaviors of retention time in each run with a non-linear alignment algorithm (Weisser et al,). Specifically, only those peptide peak groups identified in more than 1/3 samples were reported and considered for alignment with the max FDR quality of 0.1 (quality cutoff to still consider a feature for alignment) and/or the further constraint of < 100 s RT difference in LC gradient after iRT normalization.
Next, to obtain a high-quality quantitative data at the protein level, at the first step, we only accepted those proteins whose peptides had been identified in at least 90% of all the samples for proteomic profiling. Moreover, peptides that were shared between different proteins [non-proteotypic peptides (Mallick et al,)] were discarded for quantification. The re-quantification option by OpenSWATH (Rost et al,) was then enabled to re-quantify the missing values. Secondly, to retrieve the protein quantification information from those peptides identified in more than 1/3 but < 90% of the samples, we firstly enabled the re-quantification option of OpenSWATH to re-quantify the missing values by the local MS2 noise, then we fit our model at peptide-level, accepted those peptides whose residual variance (see below section of variance decomposition) was < 65% (so that an equal average of residual variance was achieved when compared to the first step). To quantify the protein abundance levels across 232 samples, we summed up the most abundant identified peptides (that is, 595 peptides) for each protein (Top three peptides, if > 3 peptides identified). This allows for reliably estimating global protein-level changes as shown in previous studies (Cima et al,; Ludwig et al,; Liu et al,; Weisser et al,). The re-quantification in both steps totally retrieved signals for 10.07% of the missing cells in the protein-level data matrix. The two-step filtering strategy essentially discarded those peptides that were not detected in majority of the samples (but got imputed by highly variable noisy background using re-quantificaton algorithm) and therefore filtered the consistent, high-quality protein signal groups among samples so that enough data points could be used for further variance decomposition. In total, quantification data of 342 unique Swiss-Prot proteins across all the 232 twin plasma samples were used for subsequent analyses.
Genotyping and imputation
Our samples are a subset of the Twins UK dataset. SNP genotyping of the Twins UK dataset (N = 6,000) was done with a combination of Illumina HumanHap300, HumanHap610Q and 1M-Duo chips and was performed by The Wellcome Trust Sanger Institute and National Eye Institute via NIH/CIDR. Similar exclusion criteria were applied to each of the three datasets separately. Sample exclusion criteria were (i) sample call rate < 98%, (ii) heterozygosity across all SNPs ≥ 2 SD from the sample mean, (iii) evidence of non-European ancestry as assessed by PCA comparison with HapMap3 populations and (iv) observed pairwise IBD probabilities suggestive of sample identity errors. We corrected misclassified monozygotic and dizygotic twins based on IBD probabilities. SNPs exclusion criteria were: (i) Hardy–Weinberg P-value < 10−6, assessed in a set of unrelated samples; (ii) MAF < 1%, assessed in a set of unrelated samples; and (iii) SNP call rate < 97% (SNPs with MAF ≥ 5%) or < 99% (for 1% ≤ MAF < 5%). Prior to merging, we performed pairwise comparison among the three datasets and further excluded SNPs and samples to avoid spurious genotyping effects, identified as follows: (i) concordance at duplicate samples < 1%; (ii) concordance at duplicate SNPs < 1%; (iii) visual inspection of QQ plots for logistic regression applied to all pairwise dataset comparisons; (iv) Hardy–Weinberg P-value < 10−6, assessed in a set of unrelated samples; and (v) observed pairwise IBD probabilities suggestive of sample identity errors. We then merged the three datasets, keeping individuals typed at the largest number of SNPs when an individual was typed at two different arrays. Samples were genotyped on a combination of the HumanHap300, HumanHap610Q, 1M-Duo and 1.2MDuo 1M Illumina arrays. Samples were imputed into the 1,000 Genomes Phase 1 reference panel (data freeze, 10/11/2010) (Abecasis et al,) using IMPUTE2 (Howie et al,) and filtered [MAF < 0.01, IMPUTE info value < 0.8 and HWE (P < 1e-5)]. We ended with 3,552,380 SNPs in 113 of our 116 individuals.
Variance decomposition of protein and peptide level
It is known that variance components models are sensitive to traits that have a distribution different from normal. To get robust results, we transformed the protein quantifications using a rank normal transformation. To estimate the variance components of plasma protein level, we used a linear mixed model with two fixed effects and four random effects:  
where plate and time are fixed effects representing the sample plate and the time interval between the two time points (time is 0 in time point 1 and the actual time interval in time point 2) and the rest are random effects:
 g is the polygenic effect. 
 c is the shared environment effect. 
 id is the effect the individual environment. 
 w is effect of the visit (longitudinal effects, or aging effect in this study). 
 e are the residuals. 
These data present a complex structure of correlation because we have related individuals measured twice. The expected correlation structure between a twin pair can be represented as:  
where  represent the variance of the X component:
 2Φ is the expected kinship coefficient based on the observed relationships—that is, 1 for MZ twins, ½ for DZ twins and 0 otherwise. 
 C is the shared environment matrix, 1 per all the twin pairs. 
 ID is the individual matrix, it takes into account that the same individual is measured in time point 1 and in time point 2. It is 1 for samples of the same individual in time points 1 and 2, and 0 otherwise. 
 W is the visit matrix, it takes into account the fact that the two sisters of a twin pair went together to the visit. It is 1 for the two sisters at each visits, 0 otherwise. 
 I is the identity matrix. 
Heritability was defined as , and the rest of the variance components were defined in the same way. The statistical analyses were carried out using SOLAR v 6.5.8 software package (Almasy & Blangero,).
It is worth to note that, due to the limited samples size, it is difficult to separate perfectly the heritability and the common environmental effects components. The sum of these two components interpreted as a family effect, however, estimates more robustly (Kato et al,; Nicholson et al,).
pQTL determination
High-throughput experiments can generate batch effects that are difficult to control. In the transcriptomics field, it is widely acknowledged that removing the first principal components of the expression dataset removes unknown batch effects and increases the power to find eQTLs. We borrowed this technique, and before the pQTL analysis, we regressed out the first 10 principal components of the protein data. Since our data samples are twins, they are not independent observations and we need to take that into account in our models. We used the approach previously described (Aulchenko et al,) to keep the residuals of a mixed model that removed the effects of the family structure using the implementation in GenAbel R package (Aulchenko et al,). We then transformed those residuals using a rank normal transformation to avoid undesired outlier effects of the associations.
To identify pQTL associations, we performed a linear regression of the transformed residuals on all the SNPs in a 1-Kb window around the transcription start site for each gene and kept the best association per gene. To assign statistical significance of our associations, we run 20,000 permutations for each protein to estimate a null distribution. We shuffled the sample name in the protein data and repeated the association analysis keeping the best association for each permutation. Using this null distribution, we calculated an empirical P-value per each protein. This approach is better than having a uniform threshold for all the proteins because we take into account that for some proteins, we test more SNPs than for others and then, the chances for spurious association are larger too. We performed the SNP significance analysis separately for time points 1 and 2 and then combined the P-values from the two time points using the Fisher method for those SNPs influencing protein abundance in the same direction. In this way, we got a single P-value per each protein. Finally, we call significant pQTLs based on a 10% FDR using the R package q-value (Storey & Tibshirani,).
Overlap with eQTLs
To check if the effect of our pQTLs on protein level was due to a change in gene expression, we looked for associations of the pQTL SNPs with gene expression measured using RNAseq technology in four tissues (fat, LCLs, skin and blood) in about 800 female twins (Buil et al,). We analyzed each tissue and each gene separately. For each gene, we used a linear model to estimate the association between the pQTL and a normalized expression of each exon. We kept the best P-value per gene and estimated its statistical significance by comparison with a null distribution obtained by permuting the gene expression labels 10,000 times.
Other bioinformatic analyses
Hierarchical clustering analysis (HCA) was performed by Cluster 3.0 on the log-transformed, 2-dimensional-centered and normalized peptide intensities and visualized by Treeview. R software was used for plotting histograms. All the P-values indicating the significance of the data distribution difference were also reported by R using the Wilcoxon rank-sum test with continuity correction (the command is wilcox.test). The paired Wilcoxon test was used to compare the contribution of heritability and family component between two time points. The proteins significantly affected by the four biological components were filtered based on either a P < 0.01 or the fact that the corresponding component explains more than 25% of total variance. The annotation of biological pathways and functional processes was done using David bioinformatics resource (Huang da et al,), where the enrichment analysis was performed by taking all the proteins in our human plasma spectral library as background. The HDL protein list was extracted based on consensus summary of published HDL studies (Shah et al,), whereas the non-HDL protein list contains those proteins that have not been supported as HDL protein in either of the studies (Shah et al,).
Data availability
All the raw data of mass spectrometry measurements (SWATH-MS and shotgun), together with the input spectral library for human plasma proteome and OpenSWATH results can be freely downloaded from ProteomeXchange Consortium (http://proteomecentral.proteomexchange.org) via the PRIDE partner repository (Vizcaino et al,) with the dataset identifier PXD001064. SNP genotyping data can be accessed with the permission of the TREC committee.