ABSTRACT:
One of the trademarks of extraintestinal pathogenic Escherichia coli is adaptation of metabolism and basic physiology to diverse host sites. However, little is known how this common human pathogen adapts to permit survival and growth in blood. We used label-free quantitative proteomics to characterize five E. coli strains purified from clinical blood cultures associated with sepsis and urinary tract infections. Further comparison of proteome profiles of the clinical strains and a reference uropathogenic E. coli strain 536 cultivated in blood culture and on two different solid media distinguished cellular features altered in response to the pathogenically relevant condition. The analysis covered nearly 60% of the strains predicted proteomes, and included quantitative description based on label-free intensity scores for 90% of the detected proteins. Statistical comparison of anaerobic and aerobic blood cultures revealed 32 differentially expressed proteins (1.5% of the shared proteins), mostly associated with acquisition and utilization of metal ions critical for anaerobic or aerobic respiration. Analysis of variance identified significantly altered amounts of 47 proteins shared by the strains (2.7%), including proteins involved in vitamin B6 metabolism and virulence. Although the proteomes derived from blood cultures were fairly similar for the investigated strains, quantitative proteomic comparison to the growth on solid media identified 200 proteins with substantially changed levels (11% of the shared proteins). Blood culture was characterized by up-regulation of anaerobic fermentative metabolism and multiple virulence traits, including cell motility and iron acquisition. In a response to the growth on solid media there were increased levels of proteins functional in aerobic respiration, catabolism of medium-specific carbon sources and protection against oxidative and osmotic stresses. These results demonstrate on the expressed proteome level that expression of extraintestinal virulence factors and overall cellular metabolism closely reflects specific growth conditions. Data are available via ProteomeXchange with identifier PXD002912.
METHODS:
EXPERIMENTAL PROCEDURES
Ethical Statement
The bacterial samples used in this research originated from blood samples collected for routine microbiological tests, which are made on a regular basis; therefore, no additional procedures were carried out on the patients. Samples were analyzed after written informed consent from the patients. A healthy volunteer donated blood sample, which was used for blood culture of UPEC 536. The regional ethical committee approved the study (REK-vest nr 2013–102).
Blood Cultures and Microbiological Characterization of Clinical Isolates
The blood specimens (10 ml per blood culture) were collected from adult patients with suspected sepsis, which were hospitalized at the Haukeland University Hospital (HUH), Bergen, Norway, in the period from November 2014 to May 2015. The blood cultures were drawn for clinical purposes prior to any antibiotic treatment, and detection/identification of bacterial species was conducted at the Department of Microbiology, HUH, according to the accepted clinical standard. Automated blood culture system BacT/ALERT 3D (bioMérieux, Inc., Durham, NC) was used for microbial growth detection. Blood culture broths (BacT/ALERT® FA Plus with aerobic conditions and BacT/ALERT® FN Plus with anaerobic conditions; bioMérieux Inc.) identified as positive by the BacT/ALERT 3D instrument were analyzed using microflex LT, a MALDI-TOF MS instrument (Bruker Daltonics GmbH, Bremen, Germany) for direct species identification. The time for development of positive blood cultures varied between 8–22 h. Antimicrobial susceptibility testing by disk diffusion (Oxoid Lmt., Hampshire, UK) was done according to guidelines and clinical breakpoints established by the European Committee on Antimicrobial Susceptibility Testing (EUCAST). Antibiotic disks used for the tests included: ampicillin, amoxicillin-clavulanate, piperacillin-tazobactam, cefuroxime, ceftazidime, cefotaxime, meropenem, gentamicin, ciprofloxacin, and trimethoprim/sulfamethoxazole. Isolate G5m was in addition tested against cefepime and tigecycline. Reference strain 536 was used for inoculation of anaerobic/aerobic blood culture pair injected with blood donated from a volunteer. These cultures were processed identically as the clinical blood cultures, after being flagged positive for microbial growth by the BacT/ALERT 3D instrument.
Isolation of Bacteria from Blood Culture Bottles and Cell Lysis
Broth from each blood culture was first separated from adsorbent polymeric beads, which are used for antimicrobial neutralization, by a sterile sieve. Next, 30 ml of the broth was mixed in a ratio 2:1 with lysis buffer (0.6% polyoxyethylene 10-oleoyl ether [Brij 97] in 0.4 m [3-(cyclohexylamino)-1-propane sulfonic acid] [CAPS]; filtered through a 0.2-μm-pore-size filter, pH 11.7), vortexed for 5s, and allowed to incubate for 5 min at room temperature. The bacterial cells were separated from lysed blood cells by centrifugation at 4495 × g for 20 min. Resulting supernatant was discarded and the bacterial cells were washed 3x with a washing buffer (20 mm Na2H2PO4 2H2O, 0.05% Brij 97, and 0.45% NaCl; filtered through a 0.2-μm-pore-size filter, pH 7.2) and 2x with Tris-buffered saline (50 mm Tris, 150 mm NaCl), under same centrifugation conditions as described above. Isolated bacterial cells were frozen at −70 °C until further processing. The cell pellet was then resuspended in an extraction buffer (2.5% SDS, 10 mm Tris/HCl, pH 8.0) and transfered to a lysing matrix A tube (MP Biomedicals, Santa Ana, CA). The cell lysis was performed mechanically by bead beating in a FastPrep FP120 Cell Disrupter (Qbiogene Inc. Carlsbad, CA) for 60 s at maximum speed (6.5 m/s). The cell extracts were cooled on ice for 5 min and centrifuged at 20,000 × g for 30 min at 4 °C. The protein content of the supernatant was quantified by using the Direct Detect® method (EMD Millipore, Billerica, MA).
Detection of Genetic Determinants by PCR
Phylogrouping of the clinical isolates was done as previously described by the quadriplex PCR method that targets three phylogenetic group marker genes (chuA, yjaA, and arpA) and a DNA fragment TspE4.C2, which is as part of a putative lipase esterase gene. The isolates were allocated to different clonal lineages by multilocus sequence typing (MLST), which is based on sequencing internal fragments of seven housekeeping genes (adk, fumC, gyrB, icd, mdh, purA, and recA). The alleles and sequence type (ST) were assigned in accordance with the E. coli MLST databases at the University of Warwick. Positive and negative controls were included in all PCR assays.
Harvesting Bacterial Cells from Solid Media
In two independent biological replicates, UPEC 536 was streaked either onto fresh blood or lactose agar plates, and cultured at 37 °C for 16 h. Several colonies were then resuspended in Lysogeny broth, and an aliquot of this suspension was pipetted onto new agar plate and evenly distributed to make a lawn. After 16h incubation at 37 °C (stationary growth phase), bacterial cells were scraped from the agar surface and resuspended in Tris-Buffered Saline (TBS). The cells were pelleted by centrifugation at 1500 × g for 10 min and then again resuspended in TBS. The washing step was repeated two times. Resuspension of the cell pellet in SDS extraction buffer and cell lysis was performed as described in the section on isolation of bacteria from blood cultures.
Filter-aided Protein Digestion
The whole cell lysates were processed according to the Multiple Enzymes for sample Digestion- Filter-Aided Sample Preparation (MED-FASP) protocol using LysC and trypsin. The resulting peptide mixtures were first desalted by using in-house made RP-C18 STAGE tips, then lyophilized at 30 °C in a vacuum concentrator (Concentrator Plus®, Eppendorf, Hamburg, Germany) and stored in −70 °C until further analysis. Prior to the LC-MS/MS the peptide mixtures were resuspended in 0.1% formic acid and 2% ACN.
LC-MS/MS
The MS/MS analysis was carried out at the Proteomics Unit at the University of Bergen on an Ultimate 3000 RSLC system (Thermo Scientific, Waltham, MA) connected to a LTQ Orbitrap mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific) equipped with a nanoelectrospray ion source. Briefly, 0.5–1 μg protein was loaded onto a preconcentration column (Acclaim PepMap 100, 2 cm × 75 μm ID nanoViper column, packed with 3 μm C18 beads) at a flow rate of 5 μl/min for 5 min using an isocratic flow of 0.1% TFA (v/v) with 2% ACN (v/v). Peptides were separated during a biphasic ACN gradient from two nanoflow UPLC pumps (flow rate of 270 nl/min) on the analytical column (Acclaim PepMap 100, 50 cm × 75 μm ID nanoViper column, packed with 3 μm C18 beads). Solvent A and B was 0.1% TFA acid (v/v) in water or ACN, respectively. Separated peptides were sprayed directly into the MS instrument during a 195 min LC run with the following gradient composition: 0–5 min 5% B, 5–6 min 5–7% B, 6–135 min 7–32% B, 135–145 min 32—% B, 145–150 min 40–90% B. Elution of very hydrophobic peptides and conditioning of the column was performed by isocratic elution with 90% B (150–170 min) and 5% B (175–195 min), respectively. Desolvation and charge production were accomplished by a nanospray Flex ion source.
The mass spectrometer was operated in data-dependent-acquisition mode to automatically switch between Orbitrap-MS and LTQ-MS/MS acquisition. Survey of full-scan MS spectra (from m/z 300 to 2000) were acquired in the Orbitrap with resolution of r = 240,000 at m/z 400 (after accumulation to a target of 1,000,000 charges in the LTQ). The method used allowed sequential isolation of the most intense ions (up to 12, depending on signal intensity) for fragmentation on the linear ion trap using collisionally induced dissociation at a target value of 10,000 charges. Target ions already selected for MS/MS were dynamically excluded for 40s. General MS conditions were as follows: electrospray voltage, 1.8 kV; no sheath; and auxiliary gas flow. Ion selection threshold was 3000 counts for MS/MS. and an activation Q-value of 0.25 and activation time of 10 ms was also applied for MS/MS.
MS/MS Data Analysis
All MS raw data files were processed together in MaxQuant (version 1.5.3.28). Andromeda search engine integrated in the MaxQuant framework performed the spectra search against the following databases: reviewed E. coli proteins from the Swiss-Prot section of the UniProtKB database (28,659 entries, downloaded on the 7th October 2015), and predicted proteomes of three genome-sequenced UPEC strains downloaded from NCBI (October 2015): CTF073 (NCBI Reference Sequence NC_004431.1; 5,364 entries for chromosome), 536 (NC_008253.1; 4,619 entries for chromosome) and EC958 (NZ_HG941718.1, NZ_HG941719.1 and NZ_HG941720.1; 4957 and 144 entries for chromosome and plasmids, respectively). UPEC strains CTF073 and EC958 represented the same sequence types as four of the clinical ExPEC isolates (ST73 and ST131). Enzyme specificity was defined in group-specific parameters as either to trypsin or LysC, allowing N-terminal cleavage to proline, and as many as two missed cleavages were allowed. Data for LysC and tryptic fractions originating from the same replicate were combined in MaxQuant. Standard settings were used for MaxQuant searches, except that lysine acetylation and glutamate/glutamine conversion to pyro-glutamate were set as variable modifications in addition to N-terminal acetylation and methionine oxidation. Carbamidomethylation of cysteines was set as a fixed modification. The initial allowed mass deviation of the precursor ion was as high as 20 ppm, and the allowed value for the fragment mass was as high as 0.5 Da. The “match between runs” option was enabled to match identifications across samples. The maximum false discovery rates (FDR) at peptide and protein levels were specified as 0.01. Normalized spectral proteins intensities (LFQ intensity) were derived by the MaxLFQ algorithms. For 112 proteins identified by single peptide, detailed information about the MS/MS spectrum, peptide sequence, and precursor m/z is provided (supplemental Table S1).
We analyzed MaxQuant output data with the Perseus module (http://www.perseus-framework.org, version 1.5.1.6). Protein functional analysis was performed using the DAVID and STRING tools, together with the EcoCyte, and UniprotKB databases. Sequence alignments of protein isoforms were performed with protein-protein BLAST (NCBI) and Clustal Omega (EMBL-EBI). Cellular localization prediction was made by PSORTb version 3.0.2. MS data were deposited in the PRIDE Proteomics IDEntifications database under accession number PXD002912.
Experimental Design and Statistical Rationale
Samples for LC-MS/MS analysis included two or four blood cultures from a patient, two blood cultures from a healthy volunteer, and two biological replicates for samples derived from agar plates. At least two technical replicates of each biological sample were included, and all samples were analyzed in a random order. A control mixed sample was prepared by combining equal volumes of processed peptide mixtures, which were derived from anaerobic and aerobic blood cultures of five strains (C4n, D4n, E4n, G5m, and 536). For qualitative proteome descriptions proteins identified in at least two replicates in blood culture (including anaerobic and aerobic condition), on blood agar or lactose agar were considered valid. For the LFQ analysis, only proteins identified in at least two replicates of a specific culturing condition, with the distinction of anaerobic and aerobic blood culture, were considered valid. Proteins with significant differential abundance were identified by statistical analysis based either on analysis of variance or on two-sided t test, which were performed on proteins log2 transformed LFQ values. In both cases FDR was kept at 1%. Technical replicates were grouped during FDR calculation that was performed by a permutation-based procedure with 250 randomizations, similar to the procedure applied to FDR calculation for differential expression analysis. Principal component analysis (PCA) was done on logarithmized LFQ values in Perseus (FDR = 1%), and details of the PCA implementation were previously described.