ABSTRACT:
Staphylococcus aureus is an opportunistic human pathogen, which can cause life-threatening disease. Proteome analyses of the bacterium can provide new insights into its pathophysiology and important facets of metabolic adaptation and, thus, aid the recognition of targets for intervention. However, the value of such proteome studies increases with their comprehensiveness. We present an MS–driven, proteome-wide characterization of the strain S. aureus HG001. Combining 144 high precision proteomic data sets, we identified 19 109 peptides from 2088 distinct S. aureus HG001 proteins, which account for 72% of the predicted ORFs. Peptides were further characterized concerning pI, GRAVY, and detectability scores in order to understand the low peptide coverage of 8.7% (19 109 out of 220 245 theoretical peptides). The high quality peptide-centric spectra have been organized into a comprehensive peptide fragmentation library (SpectraST) and used for identification of S. aureus-typic peptides in highly complex host–pathogen interaction experiments, which significantly improved the number of identified S. aureus proteins compared to a MASCOT search. This effort now allows the elucidation of crucial pathophysiological questions in S. aureus-specific host–pathogen interaction studies through comprehensive proteome analysis. The S. aureus-specific spectra resource developed here also represents an important spectral repository for SRM or for data-independent acquisition MS approaches. All MS data have been deposited in the ProteomeXchange with identifier PXD000702 (http://proteomecentral.proteomexchange.org/dataset/PXD000702).
METHODS:
2 Material and methods
2.1 Bacterial cell culture
S. aureus HG001, a derivative of NCTC8325 in which the rsbU allele carrying a 11 bp deletion was replaced by its wild type copy and which has been used in host–pathogen interaction studies before, was cultivated in tryptic soy broth (TSB; Becton, Dickinson and Company, Franklin Lakes, NJ, USA). Cells were harvested at three different points in time during growth (Supporting Information Fig. S1): exponential growth phase (exp, optical density at 600 nm/OD600nm = 0.5), entry into stationary growth phase (t0, OD600nm ≈ 6.5), and stationary growth phase (t4, OD600nm ≈ 10). Each harvested sample comprised 40 OD 600nm-units. Three biological replicates (BR) were included. Subsequently, the three different samples (exp, t0, t4) were combined to a single sample for thorough analysis in order to cover a high fraction of the theoretical proteome. After washing with 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate (ABC), the cell mixture was divided into equal aliquots for use in the different analytical approaches (Fig. 1).
2.2 Cell disruption, protein extraction, and determination of protein concentration
For processing of samples intended to be analyzed with the standard method, pellets were washed once with TE buffer (10 mM Tris/HCl pH 8, 1 mM EDTA pH 8) and afterwards resuspended in 0.5 ml 1x UT buffer (8 M urea, 2 M thiourea). Subsequently, cells were disrupted in three cycles of 30 s ultrasonication and 30 s cooling on ice. After centrifugation (10 min, 4°C, 8600 × g) supernatants containing crude protein extract were used for MS analysis.
For samples, which were collected for IEF fractionation and two 2D-SCX, cell pellets were resuspended in lysis buffer (50 mM ABC, 0.1% RapiGest (Waters Corp., Milford, MA, USA)) and mechanically disintegrated in the presence of acid- washed glass beads (diameter 0.4–0.6 μm; Sigma-Aldrich, St. Louis, MO, USA) by vigorous shaking using a TurboMix Adapter and VortexGenie2 (Scientific Industries, Inc., Bohemia, NY, USA) for 10 min at 4°C. After centrifugation (10 min, 4°C, 15 000 × g), supernatants were collected and the extraction procedure was repeated three times.
Protein concentrations of all protein extracts were determined photometrically using a Bradford Assay (Bio-Rad Laboratories, Hercules, CA, USA).
2.3 Reduction, alkylation, and tryptic digestion of protein samples with subsequent C18-purification of the resulting peptides
Protein samples of 4 μg (standard method),1 mg (off-gel IEF fractionation), and 10 μg (2D-SCX) were reduced in 5 mM tris-2-carboxyethyl-phosphine (TCEP) [30 min, 37°C, shaking at 500 rpm, in the dark] and afterwards alkylated in 10 mM iodoacetamide (IAA) (1 h, 25°C, shaking at 500 rpm; protected from light). The excess of TCEP and IAA was removed by incubating the samples with 12.5 mM N-acetyl-cysteine (NAC) (10 min; 25°C, shaking at 500 rpm). Subsequently, proteins were digested with trypsin (Promega, Madison, WI, USA) at 37°C overnight using an enzyme:protein mass ratio of 1:25 (standard method) or 1:100 (off-gel IEF/2D-SCX). Digestion was stopped with a final concentration of 1% acetic acid and 1% TFA in the standard method and the off-gel IEF/2D-SCX method, respectively. All samples were centrifuged (10 min, 4°C, 8656 × g). The peptide-containing supernatants of 4 μg samples were subjected to C18 peptide purification using 2 μg-ZipTip μ-C18 pipette tips (Merck Millipore, Billerica, MA, USA). The pH of 1 mg samples was adjusted to about 3 with 0.5 M ABC, and afterwards peptides were purified using SepPak Vac tC18 1cc Cartridges (Waters Corp., Milford, MA, USA). The 10 μg samples were temporarily divided into two equal fractions and purified using 5 μg-ZipTipC18 pipette tips (Merck Millipore).
2.4 Off-gel IEF fractionation
C18-purified peptides resulting from a 1 mg protein sample were fractionated according to their pI using the Agilent OFFGEL 3100 Fractionator system (Agilent Technologies, Santa Clara, CA, USA) according to the manufacturer’s protocol. The rehydration was carried out for 1 h at a voltage of 500 V (current limit: 50 μA, power limit: 200 mW). Afterwards, the peptides were focused using IPG-strips (24 cm, pI range: 3–10; GE Healthcare Europe, Glattbrugg, Switzerland) at a voltage of 8000 V (current limit: 100 μA, power limit: 300 mW) until 50 kVh were reached (after about 16 h). Finally, the pH of each of the 24 collected fractions was adjusted to about 2 to 3 with 5% acetic acid, and peptides were purified using MicroSpin columns C18 Silica (The Nest Group, Southborough, MA, USA). In order to standardize the peptide concentration of samples prior to injecting a constant volume into the LC-MS instrument, 10% of the volume of each purified fraction was again subjected to a further purification using 2 μg-ZipTip μ-C18 pipette tips (Merck Millipore, Billerica, MA, USA). Since this ZipTip type has the capacity to bind 2 μg of peptides, this second purification step resulted in a comparable eluate amount and concentration for all samples after off-gel IEF fractionation.
2.5 2D-SCX
Peptides were separated by online SCX fractionation using 2D salt steps on a nano column (Poros 10S, 300 μm × 10 cm, nanoViper, SCX, 10 μm) via an Ultimate 3000 RSLC- nano (Thermo Scientific, former Dionex, Idstein, Germany). Five μg of trypsin-digested peptides were loaded and subsequently eluted in seven fractions by injection of 12 μl salt buffer using salt plug concentrations ranging from 2 to 500 mM NaCl. Further details are listed in Supporting Information S1.
2.6 LC-MS/MS mass spectrometric analysis
Reversed phase nano LC was done with an Ultimate 3000 RSLCnano (Dionex/Thermo Fisher Scientific, Idstein, Germany). Peptides were first loaded on a trap column (Acclaim PepMap 100, 100 µm × 2 cm nano Viper, C18, 5 μm, 100 A°; Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA) and then analyzed using an analytical column (Acclaim PepMap RSLC, 75 µm × 15 cm nano Viper, C18, 2 μm, 100 A°; Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA). Reversed phase chromatography was performed with a binary buffer system consisting of 0.1% acetic acid, 2% ACN (buffer A), and 0.1% acetic acid in 100% ACN (buffer B). The peptides were separated by a linear gradient of buffer B from 2% up to 25% for 30, 100, and 120 min for SCX or off-gel IEF pre-fractionated samples, for non-fractionated samples (standard method), and for samples from the cell culture infection model, respectively, with a flow rate of 300 nL/min. The columns were operated at a constant temperature of 40°C. The LC was coupled to a Q Exactive mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA) via a TriVersa NanoMate (Advion Biosciences, Norwich, UK). The MS-instrument was operated in data-dependent acquisition mode. MS settings were as follow: survey full-scan spectra were acquired with a resolution R = 70 000, automated gain control (AGC) target was set to 3e6 ions, the maximum injection time was set to 250 ms. MS/MS scan events were repeated for top ten peaks using the higher energy collisional dissociation mode at normalized collision induced energy of 27.5%, underfill ratio (5%) with an intensity threshold of 8.3e4 ions was selected. Already targeted ions for MS/MS were dynamically excluded for 40 s with monoisotopic precursor selection enabled. Further details are listed in Supporting Information S1.
2.7 Data analysis
MS raw files were converted into mzXML and mgf formats using the Trans Proteomics Pipeline (TPP) version v4.6 OCCUPY rev 2, Build 201308090511. Each mgf file was searched against an S. aureus-specific database on a MASCOT Server by MASCOT Daemon version 2.3.2. The four most frequent modifications – deamidation, carbamidomethylation (C), oxidation (M), and conversion of Gln to pyroGlu (N-term Q), which were determined prior to analysis by an error-tolerant search were included as variable modifications. Further chemical processing modifications or biological PTMs were not considered or analyzed, respectively. Identification quality was further controlled via the Percolator score false discovery rate (FDR). Further details are listed in Supporting Information S1. All data are available at the PRIDE Archive (http://www.ebi.ac.uk/pride/archive/) of the ProteomeXchange Consortium through accession number PXD000702.
Data filtered for ion scores of at least 20 were exported to Microsoft Office Excel. For each file, an ion score >20 is higher than the threshold score which indicates identity or extensive homology with p < 0.05 according to the MASCOT algorithm. The average ion score at the threshold of p < 0.05 was 16.5, and the corresponding FDR averaged out at 0.19. Individual ion scores at the threshold of p < 0.05 for the individual files are listed in Supporting Information S1. Thus, limiting data to results with an ion score >20 included only the most reliable data into the analysis.
Peptide and protein lists were compared and Venn diagrams were generated with the VENNY tool (Juan Carlos Oliveros; http://bioinfogp.cnb.csic.es/tools/venny/index.html; 2007). Area-proportional Venn diagrams displaying the area in proportion to the numbers of items were generated based on the eulerAPE v3 (Luana Micallef and Peter Rodgers, http://www.eulerdiagrams.org/eulerAPE/; 2013). ProteinCenter (Version 3.10.10016; Thermo Fisher Scientific Inc., Waltham, MA, USA) was utilized to calculate pI values and sequence coverage. Peptide data are available as Supporting Information Table S2. Density functions as well as histogram data were calculated and depicted using R scripts. Voronoi treemaps were created using the Paver software (DECODON GmbH, Greifswald, Germany), which employed the assignment of proteins to functions from the TIGRFAMs protein family classification scheme by using HMMER/HMMScan, an all protein sequences containing FASTA-file of S. aureus HG001, and the TIGRFAMs Hidden Markov models (HMMs; http://www.jcvi.org/cgibin/tigrfams/index.cgi; Current Release: 13.0, 4284 families, August 15 2012). Only the best sequence to HMM hit was considered as a “protein sequence to TIGRFAMs assignment”. Proteins without a TIGRFAMs assignment are not displayed. By definition, TIGRFAMs are quasi-hierarchically structured meaning that TIGRFAMs-distinguished proteins may be allocated to multiple functional groups, so-called sub-roles, which are classified in 16 main roles. For a clearer representation, we divided these 16 main roles into six meta-roles whose definition was inspired by KEGG Brite. The six meta-roles are termed “metabolism”, “cell structure”, “cellular processes”, “signal transduction”, and “genetic information processing” as well as a class of non-allocated TIGRFAMs (“unmapped”). Newly TIGRFAMs-distinguished proteins were, wherever possible, allocated manually to a meta-role other than the “unmapped” one (data not shown). To avoid the occurrence of proteins in more than one meta-role, only primary functions were considered with multiple or secondary assignments being manually removed (data not shown). Finally, 1941 proteins were assigned to a functional group (including the “unmapped” group).
The areas of the Voronoi cells representing the proteins were used to encode the proteins’ sequence lengths. Subdivision of the protein Voronoi cells was performed in such a way that the length of a peptide resulting from a zero missed cleavage theoretical tryptic digestion determined the size of the peptide cell.
2.8 SpectraST database
Using TPP, a SpectraST database was generated from 144 LC-MS/MS runs which resulted from the analysis of the three different methods described above: (i) off-gel IEF fractionation (72 runs of three BR with 24 fractions each); (ii) SCX fractionation (21 runs of three BR with 7 fractions each); and (iii) the standard method (three BR without fractionation). Furthermore, 48 files resulting from a technical replication of the IEF off-gel fractionation of two BR were integrated into the database, which extended the peptide data complexity. Briefly, the raw data were translated into mzXML and later to the MASCOT generic file format (mgf). These mgf-files were searched using MASCOT and the resulting dat-files were restricted to those spectra/peptide identifications with p < 0.05 according to the MASCOT algorithm (indicating identity or extensive homology) as described above for data analysis.
In order to use only peptide matches of highest confidence, only data with ion scores > 20 were further converted to pep.XML-files, which were subsequently compiled into a SpectraST specific library (spec.lib library). This SpectraST library for the comprehensive S. aureus proteome is available online at the PRIDE Archive (http://www.ebi.ac.uk/pride/archive/) of the ProteomeXchange Consortium through accession number PXD000702. After the spec.lib library had been used for identification searches only results with an absolute precursor tolerance of less than 0.01 and a DOT score of at least 0.5 were considered as reliably identified. The dot score cutoff of 0.5 was determined after plotting the number of identified proteins depending on the dot score values (Supporting Information Fig. S2) where the total number of identified proteins was inversely correlated with the dot score only at dot score values of 0.5 or greater. Since dot scores between 0 and 0.5 always resulted in constant total numbers of identified proteins we concluded that dot scores in this range did not discriminate true identifications from unspecific false identifications (Supporting Information Fig. S2).
2.9 Cell culture infection experiments
Cell culture infection experiments were performed as described. Briefly, confluent cell culture dishes of S9 cells were infected with S. aureus HG001 pJL74, a green fluorescent protein (GFP)-expressing strain, which had been incubated in the presence of ferric-oxide core nanoparticles (FeOx-NP) for 24 h prior to infection. The GFP-expressing strain was only chosen for control purposes because it allowed determination of bacterial cell counts using a Guava EasyCyte flow cytometer (Millipore, Billerica, MA, USA). After an internalization phase of 1 h, non-internalized bacteria were lysed using lysostaphin. After washing with PBS, the infected host cells were lysed in 0.3% Triton X-100 in A. dest. 2.5 h and 4.5 h after infection, and intact, FeOx-NP-labeled bacteria were captured by a 2 Tesla magnet (HOKIMag, Hoock GmbH, Kiel, Germany). Captured bacteria were washed with PBS when still remaining in the magnetic field in order to remove contaminants of host cell debris. Bacteria were collected on a filter membrane, washed again, and digested with lysostaphin and trypsin without reduction and alkylation directly on the membrane. The resulting peptides were subjected to MS analysis with the standard method, except that the 15 cm analytical column was replaced with a 25 cm column and that the gradient time was increased to 120 min. MS raw data were transformed to mzXML and mgf formats and subjected to a MASCOT database search as well as a search based on the newly generated SpectraST database. MASCOT identifications were accepted only with ion scores of at least 20, thus, at the same cutoff as for the pure TSB-culture samples, while identifications from the SpectraST database search approach had to pass the criteria of a minimal DOT score 0.5 and an absolute precursor tolerance of less than 0.01 as described above.
2.10 In silico tryptic digestion and calculation of score values for the prediction of peptide detectability
The FASTA-database including the complete predicted proteome of S. aureus was subjected to an in silico tryptic digestion using R scripts with the following parameter settings: peptide mass 550–5500; minimal peptide length 5; maximal missed cleavages 2; without static or variable modifications. This in silico digestion resulted in a set of about 220 245 theoretical peptides. Approximately 99% of these peptides were unique for distinct proteins. For the calculation of score values, different data (sub) sets were employed: (i) all detected peptide sequences from the 144 LC-MS runs; peptides with missed cleavage(s) counted as individual peptides while modified peptides were not counted as separate peptides; (ii) all theoretical peptides from the in silico digestion excluding all peptides of proteins for which no peptide was detected; (iii) all theoretical peptides from the in silico digestion. CHEMscore values for peptides were calculated using the ProteinProspector/MS-Digest tool (v 5.10.12; UCSF – University of California, San Francisco, CA, USA). The algorithm was modified for equal weighting of Arg- and Lys-tryptic peptides since the preference of Arg-peptides over Lys-peptides which occurs during MALDI measurements was not observed for our ESI data set. CONSeQuence score values were calculated using the provided online-tool without modification of the algorithm. The DetectabilityPredictor score was calculated as indicated.