ABSTRACT:
The field of proteomics has evolved hand-in-hand with technological advances in LC-MS/MS systems, now enabling the analysis of very deep proteomes in a reasonable time. However, most applications do not deal with full cell or tissue proteomes but rather with restricted subproteomes relevant for the research context at hand or resulting from extensive fractionation. At the same time, investigation of many conditions or perturbations puts a strain on measurement capacity. Here, we develop a high-throughput workflow capable of dealing with large numbers of low or medium complexity samples and specifically aim at the analysis of 96-well plates in a single day (15 min per sample). We combine parallel sample processing with a modified liquid chromatography platform driving two analytical columns in tandem, which are coupled to a quadrupole Orbitrap mass spectrometer (Q Exactive HF). The modified LC platform eliminates idle time between measurements, and the high sequencing speed of the Q Exactive HF reduces required measurement time. We apply the pipeline to the yeast chromatin remodeling landscape and demonstrate quantification of 96 pull-downs of chromatin complexes in about 1 day. This is achieved with only 500 μg input material, enabling yeast cultivation in a 96-well format. Our system retrieved known complex-members and the high throughput allowed probing with many bait proteins. Even alternative complex compositions were detectable in these very short gradients. Thus, sample throughput, sensitivity and LC/MS-MS duty cycle are improved severalfold compared with established workflows. The pipeline can be extended to different types of interaction studies and to other medium complexity proteomes.
METHODS:
EXPERIMENTAL PROCEDURES
Preparation of Yeast Lysates
GFP-tagged yeast strains from the Saccharomyces cerevisiae GFP Clone Collection, the parental strain BY4741 and the control strain pHis3-GFP were cultured in YPD liquid medium in 96-deep well plates (Sarstedt, Nümbrecht, Germany) at standard conditions. We used 32 distinct yeast strains in biological triplicates, resulting in 96 experimental samples. Yeast cells were grown until they reached an Optical Density600 nm of around 1, followed by harvesting culture volumes equaling 2 ODs per well. Yeast cell pellets were dissolved in 300 μl lysis buffer (150 mm NaCl, 50 mm Tris-HCl (pH 8.0), 1 mm MgCl2, 5% glycerol, 1% IGEPAL CA-630 (Sigma-Aldrich, Schnelldorf, Germany), complete protease inhibitors (Roche, Mannheim, Germany), 1% benzonase (Merck, Darmstadt, Germany)), transferred into FastPrep tubes (MP Biomedicals, Eschwege, Germany) containing 1 mm silica spheres (lysing matrix C, MP Biomedicals), and lysed in a FastPrep24 instrument (MP Biomedicals) for 6 × 1 min at maximum speed. Lysates were cleared by centrifugation at 16,100 × g for 10 min at 4 °C.
Affinity Purification
Each well of a GFP-multiTrap plate (ChromoTek, Martinsried, Germany) was washed three times with 200 μl buffer 1 (150 mm NaCl, 50 mm Tris-HCl, pH 8.0) and then incubated with the cleared yeast cell lysate (500 μg total protein extract) with gentle shaking at 100 rpm for 60 min at 4 °C. Next, each well was washed twice with 200 μl buffer 2 (150 mm NaCl, 50 mm Tris-HCl (pH 8.0), 0.25% IGEPAL CA-630) and four times with 200 μl buffer 1 before incubation with 25 μl elution buffer (2 m urea, 20 mm Tris-HCl (pH 8.0), 1 mm DTT, 100 ng sequence-grade modified trypsin (Promega, Madison, WI, USA) at room temperature for 90 min. Subsequently, the resulting peptides were alkylated with 25 μl alkylation buffer (2 m urea, 20 mm Tris HCl (pH 8.0), 5 mm iodoacetamide) and finally washed once with 50 μl urea buffer (2 m urea, 20 mm Tris HCl, pH 8.0) for 10 min, respectively. The supernatants from the elution, alkylation and washing step were collected after each step and combined in a clean 96-well plate. This plate was incubated overnight at room temperature to ensure a complete digest. The next morning, the digest was stopped by addition of 10 μl 10% TFA per well. The acidified peptides were purified on StageTips containing two layers of Poly(styrenedivinylbenzene)-Reversed-Phase Sulfonate (Empore 2241, 3 m, Neuss, Germany) material to desalt and purify the peptides. Samples were eluted from the StageTips with 60 μl elution buffer (80% acetonitrile, 1% ammonium hydroxide) and evaporated in a SpeedVac concentrator for 30 min. The remaining peptide solution volume was adjusted to 4 μl with buffer A* (2% ACN, 0.1% formic acid).
LC-MS/MS Analysis
Online chromatography was performed with a modified Thermo EASY-nLC 1000 UHPLC system (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Bremen, Germany) coupled online to the Q Exactive HF instrument with a nano-electrospray ion source (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Two analytical columns (15 cm long, 75 μm inner diameter) were packed in-house with ReproSil-Pur C18 AQ 1.9 μm reversed phase resin (Dr. Maisch GmbH, Ammerbuch, Germany) in buffer A (0.5% formic acid) and matched with regard to back-pressure to ensure intercolumn reproducibility. During online analysis, the analytical columns were placed in a modified column heater (Sonation GmbH, Biberach, Germany) regulated to a temperature of 55 °C. Modifications to both systems are described in RESULTS. Peptides were loaded onto the analytical columns with buffer A at a back pressure of 650 bar (generally resulting in a flow rate of 500 nL/min) and separated with two distinct linear gradients of 8–30% buffer B (80% ACN and 0.5% formic acid) at a flow rate of 450 nL/min controlled by IntelliFlow technology over 10 min and 22 min, respectively (generally at a back pressure of around 500 bar). Online quality control was performed with SprayQc, which was extended with an additional plugin to support a high-voltage switch controlling the spray voltage for the analytical columns (RESULTS). MS data were acquired with a Q Exactive Plus (27 min gradients) and a Q Exactive HF (14 min gradients) instrument, as the latter has been found to be up to twice as fast and thus capable of dealing with the fast chromatography of the 14 min gradient. The instruments were programmed with a data-dependent top 5 and top 10 method, respectively, dynamically choosing the most abundant not yet sequenced precursor ions from the survey scans (300–1,650 Th). Instruments were controlled using Tune 2.5 and Xcalibur 3.0.63. At a maximum ion inject time of 45 ms for both instruments, the cycle time was ∼800 ms, sufficient for generating a median of 16 data points (14 min) or 25 data points (27 min) over the observed elution peaks (RESULTS). Further settings were chosen according to their previously determined optimal values. Sequencing was done with higher-energy collisional dissociation fragmentation with a target value of 1e5 ions determined with predictive automatic gain control, for which the isolation of precursors was performed with a window of 1.4 Th. Survey scans were acquired at a resolution of 70,000 and 60,000, respectively, at m/z 200 and the resolution for HCD spectra was set to 17,500 and 15,000, respectively, at m/z 200. Normalized collision energy was set to 27 and the “underfill ratio,” specifying the minimum percentage of the target ion value likely to be reached at maximum fill time was defined as 10% (27 min) and 40% (14 min). The elevated sequencing threshold ensured that, with the reduced complexity of samples, the fragmentation scans are of higher quality. Furthermore, the S-lens radio frequency level was set to 60, which gave optimal transmission of the m/z region occupied by the peptides from our digest. We excluded precursor ions with unassigned, single, or five and higher charge states from fragmentation selection.
Data Analysis
All data were analyzed with the MaxQuant proteomics data analysis workflow version 1.4.3.14. The false discovery rate (FDR) cut off was set to 1% for protein and peptide spectrum matches. Peptides were required to have a minimum length of seven amino acids and a maximum mass of 4,600 Da. MaxQuant was used to score fragmentation scans for identification based on a search with an initial allowed mass deviation of the precursor ion of a maximum of 4.5 ppm after time-dependent mass calibration. The allowed fragment mass deviation was 20 ppm. Fragmentation spectra were identified using the UniprotKB S. cerevisiae database (based on 2014–07 release; 6,643 entries) combined with 262 common contaminants by the integrated Andromeda search engine. Enzyme specificity was set as C-terminal to arginine and lysine, also allowing cleavage before proline, and a maximum of two missed cleavages. Carbamidomethylation of cysteine was set as fixed modification and N-terminal protein acetylation and methionine oxidation as variable modifications. Both “match between runs,” with a maximum time difference of 30 s, and label-free quantification (LFQ) with standard settings, were enabled. Additional metadata stored in the RAW files (e.g. ion inject time, noise level, etc.) were extracted using MSFileReader (Thermo Scientific) with in-house-developed tools.
Further data analysis with the goal of assigning the interactors was performed with the R scripting and statistical environment using ggplot for data visualization. Briefly, LFQ intensity values were base10 logarithmized, resulting in a normal distribution. Missing values were imputed by randomly selecting from a normal distribution centered on the lower edge of the intensity values (for this normal distribution the shift was set to 1.8 standard deviations from the mean and the width to 0.3 standard deviations; see histograms describing placement in Figs. S8 and S9). Proteins were excluded in subsequent steps for baits with less than two valid values in the triplicate for the bait (mostly presented as significantly depleted proteins due to the imputed character of the intensity values). The fold enrichment was calculated as the mean ratio between the bait measurements and the proteome measurements of the parental strain (conforming to the mean used in the consequent t test). For the fold enrichment, the standard error of the mean was additionally determined. Permutation-based FDR-controlled t test p values were calculated for each protein between the bait triplicate and the parental strain triplicate (employing 250 permutations). The p value was adjusted using a scaling factor s0 with a value of 1 prior to FDR control, which magnifies the importance of the difference of the mean. Furthermore, the correlation of each protein's LFQ intensity profile (consisting of all the measured intensity values for that protein) to the LFQ intensity profile of the bait was calculated, and the resulting correlation p values were adjusted to 1% FDR using the Benjamini and Hochberg procedure. Interactor classes were assigned based on the following rules: (A) only <1% FDR t test significance, (A+) both <1% FDR t test significance, and <1% FDR correlation significance, (B+) both <5% FDR t test significance and <1% FDR correlation significance and (B) only <5% FDR t test significance. Known interactors from the Saccharomyces Genome Database (www.yeastgenome.org) mainly fell in classes A+, A, and B+. Therefore, we conducted follow-up analyses solely on these classes. For each significant outlier, we also introduced a single significance value, based on the s0 scaling introduced in the t test, which combines the enrichment value and the t test statistic. This is calculated as the distance in log-space from the origin. The higher this value, the better the data quality and experimental success of that particular interactor. Stoichiometry information was determined in two ways. The first, termed interaction stoichiometry, is the ratio between the calculated intensity-based absolute quantification values (determining the copy numbers from the acquired mass spectrometry data) of the interactors to the bait. The second, termed abundance stoichiometry, is the ratio between the normal cellular copy numbers of the interactors to the bait.