ABSTRACT:
Protein degradation provides an important regulatory mechanism used to control cell cycle progression and many other cellular pathways. To comprehensively analyze the spatial control of protein degradation in U2OS osteosarcoma cells, we have combined drug treatment and SILAC-based quantitative mass spectrometry with subcellular and protein fractionation. The resulting data set analyzed more than 74,000 peptides, corresponding to ∼5000 proteins, from nuclear, cytosolic, membrane, and cytoskeletal compartments. These data identified rapidly degraded proteasome targets, such as PRR11 and highlighted a feedback mechanism resulting in translation inhibition, induced by blocking the proteasome. We show this is mediated by activation of the unfolded protein response. We observed compartment-specific differences in protein degradation, including proteins that would not have been characterized as rapidly degraded through analysis of whole cell lysates. Bioinformatic analysis of the entire data set is presented in the Encyclopedia of Proteome Dynamics, a web-based resource, with proteins annotated for stability and subcellular distribution.
METHODS:
EXPERIMENTAL PROCEDURES
Materials
U2OS cells were purchased from the American Type Culture Collection (ATCC, Rockville, MD). Dulbecco's modified Eagle medium (DMEM), fetal calf serum, antibiotics, NuPage gels, LDS sample buffer, MES SDS-PAGE running buffer, nitrocellulose iBlot stacks, SYPRO Ruby, Alexa Fluor 680-conjugated secondary antibodies, and CBQCA assay kit were obtained from Invitrogen (Carlsbad, CA). IrDye 800-conjugated secondary antibodies were obtained from Rockland Immunochemicals (Gilbertsville, PA). HRP-conjugated secondary antibodies were from Cell Signaling Technology (Danvers, MA). bicinchoninic acid (BCA) assay reagents, Coomassie plus (Bradford) reagent, subcellular protein fractionation Kit, detergent removal plates, 16% methanol-free paraformaldehyde, Acclaim Pepmap C18 columns and trapping cartridges, and triscarboxyethylphosphine (TCEP) (Bond-breaker neutral pH solution) were from Thermo Scientific (Waltham MA). Trypsin Gold was from Promega. Sep-Pak tC18 96-well μ-elution plates were from Waters (Milford, MA). Complete protease inhibitor mixture tablets and PhosStop phosphatase inhibitor tablets were from Roche (Basel, Switzerland). All other materials were obtained from Sigma (St. Louis, MO).
Cell Culture
Briefly, U2OS cells were grown in DMEM supplemented with 10% fetal calf serum (FCS), 2 mm l-glutamine, 100 U/l penicillin, and 100 μg/l streptomycin at 37 °C in 10% CO2, and passaged at ∼80% confluence. For SILAC labeling of U2OS cells arginine and lysine free DMEM was used and supplemented with stable isotope labeled arginine and lysine in addition to dialyzed FCS as described previously. After splitting by trypsinization, cells in SILAC media were grown to ∼80% confluence over 2–3 days before drug treatment and lysis for fractionation.
Subcellular Fractionation of SILAC-Labeled U2OS Cells
For the SILAC screen U2OS cells were treated with either DMSO, 40 μg/ml cycloheximide or 10 μm MG132 for 6 h and then combined in a 1:1:1 ratio of cells and fractionated by detergent solubility with the subcellular protein fractionation kit (Pierce). These fractions were then chloroform-methanol precipitated and further separated by molecular weight using denaturing size exclusion chromatography before digestion and liquid chromatography-tandem MS (LC-MS/MS) analysis.
Denaturing Size Exclusion Chromatography (SDS-SEC), Trypsin Digestion, and Peptide Clean-up
Using a Dionex Ultimate 3000 HPLC system, fractions resuspended in 4% SDS, 100 mm NaCl, 25 mm TCEP, 50 mm N-ethylmaleimide, 10 mm Na PO4 pH 6.0 were heated to 65 °C for 10 min, then filtered through a 0.45 μm filter. Samples were injected (50 μl per injection - 250 μg protein) onto a mAbPacSEC column (Dionex) equilibrated with 0.2% SDS, 100 mm NaCl, 10 mm Na PO4 pH 6.0. The flow rate was 0.2 ml min−1 and 8 × 200 μl fractions were collected using a low protein binding 96-deep well plate (Eppendorf). Triethylamine bicarbonate (TEAB, 1 m pH 8.0) was added to each fraction to adjust the pH to 8.0, and trypsin diluted in 0.1 m TEAB was added at a ratio of 1:50 with incubation for 18 h at 37 °C. SDS was removed from each fraction using detergent removal resin in 96-well plates as described previously. For peptide desalting trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) was added to 1% (v/v) final concentration and peptides were purified using a Sep-Pak tC18 96-well μ-elution plate. Peptides were eluted in 200 μl of 50% (v/v) acetonitrile 0.1% TFA and speedivaced to dryness before resuspension in 5% (v/v) formic acid. Peptide concentrations were determined using the CBQCA assay after 25-fold dilution of peptide samples in 0.1 m borate buffer pH 9.3.
LC-MS/MS and MS Data Analysis
Using a Dionex Ultimate 3000 nanoHPLC system, 4 μg of peptides in 5% (v/v) formic acid were injected onto an Acclaim PepMap C18 nano-trap column (Dionex). After washing with 2% (v/v) acetonitrile 0.1% (v/v) formic acid peptides were resolved on a 50 mm × 75 μm Acclaim PepMap C18 reverse phase analytical column over a 140 min organic gradient with a flow rate of 200 nl min−1. Peptides were ionized by nano-electrospray ionization at 1.2 kV using a fused silica emitter with an internal diameter of 5 μm (New Objective). Tandem mass spectrometry analysis was carried out on a QExactive mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific). Data were processed, searched, and quantified using the Maxquant software package version 1.2.2.5 as described previously, using the default settings and employing the Human Uniprot database (06/07/11) containing 109,824 entries. The settings used for the Maxquant analysis were: two failed cleavages were allowed; fixed modification was N-ethylmaleimide on cysteine; enzymes were Trypsin (K/R not before P); Variable modifications included in the analysis were methionine oxidation, deamidation of glutamine or asparagine, N-terminal pyro-glutamic acid formation, protein N-terminal acetylation. A mass tolerance of 7 ppm was used for precursor ions and a tolerance of 20 ppm was used for fragment ions. Using the default Maxquant settings a maximum false positive rate of 1% was allowed for both peptide and protein identification. This cutoff was used for accepting individual spectra as well as whole proteins in the Maxquant output. This threshold has previously been shown to be a rigorous method for identifying true positive matches. For identical protein matches in both Swissprot and Tremble within the same protein group, the match in Swissprot was reported. Isoforms were recorded in the same protein group if they shared the same peptide coverage. All replicates indicated are biological replicates and protein quantitation was derived from at least two of the biological replicates. SILAC ratios for all proteins were normalized using β-Tubulin, Histone H2A, and GAPDH ratios. No outlier data points were removed.
Statistical Analysis of SILAC Data
p values were calculated using a Student's t test comparing the three biological replicate SILAC ratios of each protein, to the three biological replicate SILAC ratios for the control, known stable proteins, i.e. β-tubulin, histone H2A, and GAPDH. For the CHX/DMSO (M/L) and MG132/DMSO (H/L) SILAC ratios a one-tailed and two-tailed t test was used respectively. Values were tested for normality using the Shapiro-Wilk test.
SDS-PAGE and Immunoblotting
For generating total cell lysates, cells were lysed in five times the total volume of cells using 2% SDS in 10 mm HEPES, 250 mm sucrose, and 1 mm EDTA (HES buffer) with 50 mm N-ethylmaleimide, Complete Protease Inhibitors EDTA-free (Roche) and PhosStop (Roche). Lysates were incubated at 65 °C and viscosity because of DNA was removed by passing the lysate through a Qiashredder (Qiagen). Equal amounts of protein were loaded for SDS-PAGE of each sample with 10 μg per lane. SDS-PAGE was performed using 4–12% (w/v) Bis-Tris NuPage gels using MES running buffer according to manufacturer's instructions but with the addition of 25 mm TCEP, in the LDS sample buffer. SYPRO Ruby staining was performed as per manufacturer's instructions (Invitrogen). For Western blotting, separated proteins were electrophoretically transferred to an iBlot nitrocellulose membrane, blocked with 3% nonfat skim milk in 0.1% Tween-20 in TBS (TBST) and incubated with primary antibody in 5% bovine serum albumin (BSA) in TBST overnight at 4 °C. After incubation, membranes were washed three times in TBST and incubated with either HRP-labeled or Alexa fluor 680/IrDye 800 labeled secondary antibodies in 3% nonfat skim milk in TBST. Proteins were visualized using Immobillon chemiluminescent substrate (Millipore) and imaged either with a cooled CCD camera (Fuji) for HRP-labeled secondary antibodies, or a Licor Odyssey CLx imager for Alexa fluor 680/IrDye 800 labeled secondary antibodies.
Immunofluorescence Microscopy
Cells were cultured on glass coverslips as described above. All subsequent steps are at 25 °C. Cells were then fixed with 3% paraformaldehyde in PBS. Fixed cells were washed with PBS, and free aldehyde groups were quenched with 50 mm glycine in PBS. The cells were then permeabilized using 1% Triton X-100 for 10 min followed by washing in PBS. Coverslips were processed for immunolabeling by blocking with 5% BSA in TBST. Primary antibodies were incubated on coverslips for 1 h in 5% BSA in TBST. Coverslips were washed in PBS. Primary antibodies were detected with Alexa Fluor 488 or Alex Fluor 594 conjugated secondary antibodies which were incubated on coverslips for 30 min in 5% BSA in TBST with 2 μg/ml Hoechst 33342. Optical sections were analyzed by confocal microscopy on a Leica SP2 AOBS inverted microscope. Images generated are a single confocal slice from the middle of the cell monolayer.
siRNA Transfection of U2OS Cells
U2OS cells were transfected with 0.45 nmoles of siRNA per condition using RNAiMax (Invitrogen) in Optimem medium (Invitrogen). After 24 h, cells were harvested by trypsinization for analysis either by SDS-PAGE or flow cytometry.
Fluorescence-activated Cell Sorting (FACS)
An asynchronous U2OS cell suspension in DMEM containing 10% FCS was incubated with 25 μg/ml Hoechst 33342 for 5 min at room temperature. Cells were sorted by DNA content into G1, S and G2-phase cell populations using an ACS Vantage DIVA instrument (BD Biosciences). Sorted cells were washed in PBS and lysed in 2% SDS in HES buffer.