ABSTRACT:
Abstract
The relative importance of regulation at the mRNA versus protein level is subject to ongoing debate. To address this question in a dynamic system, we mapped proteomic and transcriptomic changes in mammalian cells responding to stress induced by dithiothreitol over 30 h. Specifically, we estimated the kinetic parameters for the synthesis and degradation of RNA and proteins, and deconvoluted the response patterns into common and unique to each regulatory level using a new statistical tool. Overall, the two regulatory levels were equally important, but differed in their impact on molecule concentrations. Both mRNA and protein changes peaked between two and eight hours, but mRNA expression fold changes were much smaller than those of the proteins. mRNA concentrations shifted in a transient, pulse‐like pattern and returned to values close to pre‐treatment levels by the end of the experiment. In contrast, protein concentrations switched only once and established a new steady state, consistent with the dominant role of protein regulation during misfolding stress. Finally, we generated hypotheses on specific regulatory modes for some genes.
METHODS:
Materials and Methods
Cell culture and experimental setup
HeLa cells were cultured in DMEM (Sigma) with 10% fetal bovine serum (Atlanta Biologicals) and 1× penicillin–streptomycin solution (Corning Cellgro) at 37°C and 5% CO2. At approximately 60% confluency, dithiothreitol (DTT) at 2.5 mM concentration was added to induce stress for different periods of time, that is, 0, 0.5, 1, 2, 8, 16, 24, and 30 h. To account for different cellular ages at harvest, the experiment was conducted so that the experiment started with the 30‐h treatment period, and the cells were then collected at the same time (Appendix Fig S1). This protocol ensured that all cells were cultured for the same time period.
Cell counting
The cells were seeded in parallel plates 3 days before sample preparation and trypsin‐digested from the plates using 0.5% trypsin for 2 min. Trypan blue (GIBCO, Life Technologies, USA) was used to label living cells and the cells were counted using a hemocytometer. The cells were treated with 2.5 mM DTT at designed time points, collected, and counted. The assay was conducted in triplicate, and the average and standard deviation were calculated for final results.
DNA staining and flow cytometry
The control and stressed cells were digested from plates with 0.5% trypsin and prepared as single‐cell suspensions in 1× Dulbecco's phosphate‐buffered saline (DPBS) solution. The cells were then fixed and permeabilized with 70% ethanol for 2 h at 4°C. For flow cytometry analysis, cells were rehydrated in DPBS and incubated with RNase A (ribonuclease A, 19101, QIAGEN) for 30 min at 37°C to digest cellular RNA and thus decrease background RNA staining. After RNase A treatment, the fluorescent molecule propidium iodide (PI) was added into the cell suspension at 50 μg/ml concentration and incubated for 30 min at room temperature to bind DNA unspecifically. Cells with stained DNA were quantitated by flow cytometry analysis on an FL2 flow cytometer with 488‐nm laser excitation. The assay was conducted in duplicate.
Immunocytochemistry
The cells were cultured on glass cover slips in cell culture dishes with conditions identical to those described above, DTT‐treated, and fixed with fresh 4% paraformaldehyde for 10 min. The fixed cells were pre‐incubated in 0.1 M DPBS containing 10% normal donkey serum and 0.2% Triton X‐100. Condensed nuclear DNA was labeled with anti‐phospho‐histone H3 (Ser10) antibody (06‐570, EMD Millipore, MA, USA). The primary antibody incubation was conducted at 4°C overnight in the medium containing 5% normal donkey serum, 0.2% Triton X‐100, and 1% bovine serum albumin. After washing with PBS, the binding sites of the primary antibodies were revealed by incubating for 2 h at 4°C with the secondary antibody, rhodamine red‐X (RRX)‐conjugated donkey anti‐rabbit IgG. The samples were mounted by ProLong Gold antifade reagent with DAPI (P36935, Life Technologies, OR, USA) and scanned with a Leica SP5 confocal laser scanning microscope (CLSM, Leica, Mannheim, Germany). To avoid reconstruction stacking artifacts, RRX and DAPI were evaluated by sequential scanning of single‐layer optical sections.
Transcriptomics measurements
To estimate absolute mRNA expression values, Agilent‐028004 SurePrint G3 Human GE 8x60K microarrays were used. RNA extraction was conducted using Trizol (Sigma) followed by the use of phase separation using the Phase Lock Gel Heavy (5‐Prime, manufacturer's protocol). RNA was then purified using the RNA MinElute Kit (QIAGEN), and a Nanodrop ND‐1000 was used to quantitate RNA. Cyanine‐3 (Cy3)‐labeled cRNA was prepared from 50 ng RNA using the One‐Color Microarray‐Based Gene Expression Analysis (Low Input Quick Amp Labeling) Protocol (Agilent) according to the manufacturer's instructions, followed by RNAeasy column purification (QIAGEN). Dye incorporation and cRNA yield were estimated with Nanodrop; 600 ng of Cy3‐labeled cRNA was fragmented at 60°C for 30 min in a reaction volume of 25 μl containing 1× Agilent fragmentation buffer and 2.5× Agilent blocking agent following the manufacturer's instructions. Upon completion of the fragmentation reaction, 25 μl of 2× Agilent hybridization buffer was added to the fragmentation mixture and hybridized to Agilent Whole Human Genome Oligo Microarrays (G4112A) for 17 h at 65°C in a rotating Agilent hybridization oven. After hybridization, microarrays were washed for one minute at room temperature with GE Wash Buffer 1 (Agilent), for one minute at 37°C with GE Wash buffer 2 (Agilent), and for 10 s in acetonitrile. Slides were scanned immediately after washing using the Agilent DNA Microarray Scanner (G2565CA) with one‐color scan setting for 8x60k array slides (scan area 61 × 21.6 mm, scan resolution 3 μm). The scanned images were analyzed with Feature Extraction Software 10.7.3.1 (Agilent) using default parameters (protocol GE1_107_Sep09 and Grid: 028004_D_F_20110819). To confirm the accuracy of the transcriptomics experiments, selected time points were compared to data collected from the same samples, but using RNA‐seq (Appendix Fig S8).
Transcriptomics data processing and quality control
Upon data collection, probeset identifiers were mapped to Ensembl transcript and gene identifiers, and intensity data were averaged to obtain one value per gene. The data were then log‐transformed (natural log) and quantile‐normalized. A jackknife procedure was devised to remove aberrant expression measurements. In the procedure, one datum was removed at a time and the total range of variation (TRV), defined as the difference between maximum and minimum, for the remaining dataset was recorded. After following this procedure for all data points, the ratio of the median TRV to the minimum TRV was calculated and used as a measure of “spikiness” (or noisiness) of the data. The larger the TRV, the noisier the gene is. After examining the histogram of the TRV values across all genes (not shown), the threshold for tolerance level was set to 3 from the histogram of TRV values across all genes, and genes below the threshold were retained. These strict filtering rules enable the construction of a high‐confidence dataset albeit possibly removing true signal. Finally, locally weighted scatter plot smoothing (LOWESS) was applied to further smooth the filtered data for robust estimation of kinetic parameters in the PECA model. To do so, the lowess function in R was used, a standard implementation of locally weighted scatter plot smoothing, with the default parameter settings. The extend of smoothing was manually inspected: The large majority of time‐course profiles changed very little, except for those with zig‐zag patterns between time points. Dataset EV4 shows the original and post‐processed data. The final mRNA expression data for the two replicates are shown in Appendix Fig S5. As described in the Results and Appendix, several tests, for example, comparison to RNA‐sequencing data, validated the accuracy of the transcriptome data (Appendix Figs S6 and S7).
Proteomics experiments
Cell pellets were collected for each sample and the cells were Dounce‐homogenized in lysis buffer containing 10 mM KCl, 1.5 mM MgCl2, 0.5 mM DTT, and 1X protease inhibitor cocktail (Complete, Mini, EDTA‐free protease inhibitor cocktail tablets in EASYpack, Roche) in 10 mM Tris–HCl (pH 8.0). The samples were kept on ice throughout the entire procedure. Cell lysate was centrifuged at 1,000 × g at 4°C; the supernatant was saved as the cytosolic fraction, and the pellet was subjected to a single purification step via a sucrose cushion of 0.25 M and 0.88 M sucrose. The protein concentrations were determined using the Bradford protein assay (Bio‐Rad) and the samples were diluted to 2 mg/ml concentration; 50 μl of each sample was mixed with equal volume of trifluoroethanol, then 15 mM DTT was added and incubated at 55°C for 45 min. Next, the samples were alkylated with 55 mM iodoacetamide (IAA) for 30 min at room temperature in the dark. Then, the protein mixture was digested over night with mass spectrometry‐grade trypsin (Promega; at 1:50 v/w) at 37 °C. Tryptic digestion was halted by adding 2% formic acid (FA) and purified with C18 spintips (Thermo Scientific, HyperSep). The sample was stored at −80°C until LC‐MS/MS analysis.
LC‐MS/MS analysis
Peptides were separated by reverse‐phase nanoflow high‐performance liquid chromatography (nano‐HPLC) and quantitated on an LTQ Orbitrap Velos mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific). Data‐dependent analysis was performed at a resolution of 60,000 and with the top 20 most intense ions selected from each MS full scan, with dynamic exclusion set to 90 s if m/z acquisition was repeated within a 45‐s interval. In each scan cycle, the top 20 fragmentation spectra were acquired in the collision‐induced dissociation mode. For peptide separation, an Agilent ZORBAX 300SB‐C18 reverse‐phase column (150 mm × 75 μm inner diameter) and a 240‐min gradient of 2–90% acetonitrile and 0.1% formic acid were used. The experiment was conducted twice (biological replicates) and four technical replicates for each sample were collected (repeat mass spectrometry measurements). The data for technical replicates were combined during the computational analysis, while the biological replicates were kept separately.
Proteomics data processing and quality control
Raw data were processed using the MaxQuant software (1.3.0.3) (Cox and Mann, 2008), and peak lists were searched with Andromeda (Cox et al, 2011) against a database containing the translation of all predicted proteins listed in Magrane (2011) and with a list of commonly observed contaminants supplied by MaxQuant. Protein identification was performed using 20 ppm tolerance at the MS level (FT mass analyzer) and 0.5 Da at the MS/MS level (ion trap analyzer), with a posterior global FDR of 1% based on the reverse sequence of the human FASTA file. Up to two missed trypsin cleavages were allowed, and oxidation of methionine and N‐terminal acetylation were searched as variable post‐translational modification; cysteine carbamidomethylation as fixed modification. The minimal required peptide length was set to seven amino acids. The minimum number of peptide pairs used for quantitation was set to one. MaxQuant was used to combine the cytosolic and pellet samples as different fractions in the same experiment, after testing different options (Appendix Fig S8). Label‐free quantitation (LFQ) with minimum ratio count set to 1 was used. Using only one peptide for quantitation can potentially lower quantitation accuracy; however, due to the time‐series nature of the experiment, we were able to account for this additional variation by the examination of all data points across a time series and removal of noise. As is expected from complex proteomes such as that from mammalian cells, peptides can be shared between homologous proteins or splice variants, leading to “protein groups”. The protein group structure is shown in MaxQuant's proteinGroups.txt file in the Dataset EV3; for clarity, we refer to the first and main protein from each group throughout the text.
A total of > 3,200 proteins were quantitated, of which 2,828 mapped to the RNA data. To derive a high‐confidence dataset, all genes with one or more missing data points were removed, resulting in 1,820 genes for further processing. This dataset was normalized by the sum of all LFQ intensities, where the sum excluded the top 5% intensities in each sample. Removing the top 5% most intense proteins from the summation can prevent extremely abundant proteins (and potential outliers) from dominating the normalizing factor. The data were then log‐transformed (natural log) and the jackknife procedure was applied to remove outliers (i.e., spikes) in the data, similar to what was described above for the transcriptomics data. The TRV threshold was 2 upon the examination of the histograms of all TRVs (not shown). Subsequently, locally weighted scatter plot smoothing (Lowess) was applied to further smooth the time‐course data. A total of 1,237 genes were left in final dataset with complete and post‐processed, high‐confidence mRNA and protein annotations for two replicates across eight time points.
To evaluate the generality of our results, an extended dataset comprising 2,131 proteins was constructed. This dataset contains proteins with up to two missing values across the proteomics data which were imputed using Gaussian Processes. Appendix Fig S19 describes the details of this analysis and the results, which were consistent with those from the high‐confidence dataset. The original “txt” folder of MaxQuant output files is provided as Dataset EV3. Several tests, for example, Western blotting, validated the quality of the proteomics data as described in the Results and Appendix (Appendix Figs S11 and S12).
Hierarchical clustering and cluster analysis
Expression data were clustered using Perseus version 1.4.1.3. (http://141.61.102.17/perseus_doku), with default settings, that is, “correlation” and “average linkage” were used as the distance measures and clustering algorithm, respectively. Using a 0.604 distance threshold, the combined RNA and protein data were divided into 25 clusters. Clusters with more than 30 genes were chosen for function enrichment analysis using the NCBI DAVID tool (Huang et al, 2009a,b). Significantly enriched GO terms were chosen based on FDR < 0.05. The Dataset EV2 contains all GO term enrichments.
For further cluster analysis, 164 sequence features from various databases and tools were assembled (Appendix Table S2). These features include the characteristics that affect RNA and protein evolution, localization, synthesis, and degradation. Student's t‐test and hypergeometric tests were conducted to calculate the enrichment of each sequence feature in any subset of genes. Bonferroni correction for multi‐hypothesis testing was included to set the cutoff P‐value.
Protein expression control analysis
To quantitate the RNA‐ and protein‐level expression regulation, protein expression control analysis (PECA) (Teo et al, 2014) was performed. As described in the original publication, PECA constructs a probabilistic model for the kinetic parameters governing the synthesis and degradation of an outcome molecule (Y) given the precursor molecule data (X). Specifically, the model estimates the ratio of synthesis and degradation over each time period given the data of X and Y at the beginning and end of each time period and also computes the posterior probability that the rate ratio has changed between two adjacent time periods given the paired data (X, Y) at three consecutive time points (two time periods). This probability, called the change point score (CPS), is then used to estimate the overall false discovery rate of regulation change events across all genes.
Since the raw data suggested that there are discordant expression patterns between the two biological replicates, we fitted the PECA model for each replicate separately. We then performed the RNA‐ and protein‐level analyses separately. In the RNA‐level analysis, we assumed that large‐scale genomic changes such as those in ploidy have not occurred as a result of the ER stress within 30 h, and created an artificial DNA copy number data as the precursor molecule (variable X in the PECA model), with the RNA data as the outcome (variable Y in the model). We then estimated the ratio of the rates of RNA synthesis (transcription) and RNA degradation for each gene and computed the posterior probability that each intermediate time point is a change point where the rate ratio significantly changes (0.5, 1, 2, 8, 16, 24 h). In the protein‐level analysis, we used RNA data as the precursor molecule (X) and protein data as the outcome (Y), where the ratio of translation and protein degradation was the kinetic parameter of interest for each protein along with their change point probability as described above.
To summarize the RNA‐level and protein‐level regulation changes across the three phases, we extracted the maximum CPS score in each phase and considered a gene as significantly regulated during the respective phase if the score was above the thresholds associated with FDR < 0.05. At this FDR, the CPS score thresholds for “significant” RNA‐ and protein‐level regulation were 0.898 and 0.901 in the first replicate, respectively, and 0.890 and 0.898 in the second replicate. Genes were clustered using agglomerative clustering of the combined RNA/protein concentration data, followed by the dynamic tree cut algorithm (Langfelder et al, 2008). The six largest clusters as determined above were mapped to the data (Fig 5).
Data availability
All transcriptomics data are deposited in the NCBI GEO database, with the identifier GSE67901. All proteomics data are publically available from the ENSEMBL PRIDE database, identifier PXD002039.