ABSTRACT:
Associating changes in protein levels with the onset of cancer has been widely investigated to identify clinically relevant diagnostic biomarkers. In the present study, we analyzed sera from 205 patients recruited in the U.S. and Egypt for biomarker discovery using label-free proteomic analysis by liquid chromatography coupled with tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS). We performed untargeted proteomic analysis of sera to identify candidate proteins with statistically significant differences between hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) and patients with liver cirrhosis. We further evaluated the significance of 101 proteins in sera from the same 205 patients through targeted quantitation by multiple reaction monitoring (MRM) on a triple quadrupole mass spectrometer. This led to the identification of 21 candidate protein biomarkers that were significantly altered in both the U.S. and Egyptian cohorts. Among the 21 candidates, 10 were previously reported as HCC-associated proteins (eight exhibiting consistent trends with our observation), whereas 11 are new candidates discovered by this study. Pathway analysis based on the significant proteins reveals up-regulation of the complement and coagulation cascades pathway and down-regulation of the antigen processing and presentation pathway in HCC cases versus patients with liver cirrhosis. The results of this study demonstrate the power of combining untargeted and targeted quantitation methods for a comprehensive serum proteomic analysis, to evaluate changes in protein levels and discover novel diagnostic biomarkers.
METHODS:
2 Materials and methods
2.1 Experimental design
Adult patients were recruited from the outpatient clinics and inpatient wards of the Tanta University Hospital (TU cohort) in Tanta, Egypt and from the hepatology clinics at MedStar Georgetown University Hospital (GU cohort) in Washington, DC, USA. The TU cohort consists of a total of 89 subjects (40 HCC cases and 49 patients with liver cirrhosis); both HCC cases and cirrhotic controls are from either outpatient or inpatient wards. The GU cohort comprises of 116 subjects (57 HCC cases and 59 patients with liver cirrhosis). The protocol of the study was approved by the respective Institutional Review Boards at Tanta University and Georgetown University. Through peripheral venipuncture, single blood sample was drawn into 10 mL BD Vacutainer sterile vacuum tubes without the presence of anticoagulant. The blood was immediately centrifuged at 1000g for 10 min at room temperature. The serum supernatant was carefully collected and centrifuged at 2500g for 10 min at room temperature. After aliquoting, serum was kept frozen at −80 °C until use. Primary tubes and serum aliquots were labeled using anonymous confidential code numbers with no personal identifiers. Identification codes were cross-referenced with clinical information in a pass code protected computer system. Characteristics of the patient populations in TU and GU cohorts are provided in Tables 1 and 2, respectively.
We analyzed sera from HCC cases and cirrhotic controls in TU cohort and GU cohort separately. We acquired LC-MS/MS data on a 3000 Ultimate nano-LC system interfaced to an LTQ Orbitrap Velos mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific, San Jose, CA). The analysis was performed following a randomized order to avoid systematic biases (Supporting Information Table 1). In addition to the patient samples, in the analysis of the TU cohort we included in-between quality control (QC) runs of technical replicates using pooled human blood serum purchased from Sigma Aldrich and full process replicates using aliquots of a sample pooled from the patients’ sera. Technical replicates are generated by multiple injections of a single aliquot for which the protein assay/sample preparation procedure is performed once. Full process replicates, on the other hand, are generated from multiple aliquots of the same biological sample, where the protein assay/sample preparation of each aliquot is performed separately. Proteins with statistically significant differences between the two groups were identified as candidate biomarkers. On the same cohorts of patients, these findings were confirmed through targeted quantitation using MRM on a TSQ Vantage mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific, San Jose, CA). All the patient samples were analyzed by both untargeted and targeted methods. Figure 1 summarizes the workflow of this biomarker discovery study.
2.2 Materials
HPLC-grade solvents, including methanol, isopropanol, and water, were procured from Macron Fine Chemicals™-Avantor Performance Materials (Center Valley, PA). HPLC grade acetonitrile (ACN) was purchased from Fisher Scientific (Pittsburgh, PA). Ammonium bicarbonate, DL-dithiothreitol (DTT), iodoacetamide (IAA), MS-grade formic acid (FA), and pooled human blood serum (H4522) were also purchased from Sigma-Aldrich. Mass spectrometry grade trypsin was obtained from Promega (Madison, WI).
2.3 Depletion of high-abundance proteins in serum
Sera were subjected to depletion using Agilent Plasma 7 Multiple Affinity Removal Spin Cartridge from Agilent Technologies (Santa Clara, CA). This cartridge depletes the seven most abundant human serum proteins, namely albumin, IgG, antitrypsin, IgA, transferrins, haptoglobin and fibrinogen. A 15-μl aliquot of serum was depleted as stated in the protocol provided by the manufacturer. The buffer of the depleted sample was exchanged into 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate (pH 8.0) using 3kDa MWCO Amicon Ultra 0.5mL centrifugal filters from Merck Millipore (Tullagreen, Carrigtwohill, Co. Cork). This buffer was used for tryptic digestion.
2.4 Trypsin digestion
Prior to trypsin digestion, the protein concentration of depleted serum was determined by micro BCA protein assay following the protocols recommended by the vendor (Thermo Scientific/Pierce, Rockford, IL). A 20-μg aliquot of depleted serum proteins that corresponds to 0.4 μl of original serum was transferred to an Eppendorf tube, to which 100-μl of 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate was then added. Thermal denaturation was performed at 65 °C for 10 min. DTT and IAA solutions were prepared in 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate. Sample was reduced by adding a 1.25-μl aliquot of 200 mM DTT solution and incubated at 60 °C for 45 min. The reduced proteins were then alkylated by adding of a 5-μl aliquot of 200 mM of IAA and incubated at 37.5 °C for 45 min. A second 1.25-μl aliquot of 200 mM DTT was added and followed by incubation at 37.5 °C for 30 min to consume excess IAA. A 0.8-μg aliquot of trypsin was added to the sample (enzyme/substrate ratio of 1:25 w/w), and then incubated at 37.5 °C overnight. This was followed by microwave-assisted digestion at 45 °C for 30 min at the power of 50 W. The enzymatic digestion was quenched by adding 0.5-μl neat FA to the samples. Then, the samples were speed-vacuum dried and re-suspended in 0.1% FA prior to LC-MS/MS and LC-MRM-MS analyses.
2.5 LC-MS/MS data acquisition by untargeted analysis
Analysis of sera was performed on a Dionex 3000 Ultimate nano-LC system (Dionex, Sunnyvale, CA) interfaced to an LTQ Orbitrap Velos mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific, San Jose, CA), which is equipped with a nano-ESI source. LC-MS/MS analysis was performed on a tryptic digest corresponding to 1 μg of proteins which was derived from 0.2 μl of original serum considering the whole depletion and digestion process. The samples were online-purified using Acclaim PepMap100 C18 cartridge (3 μm, 100Å, Dionex). The purified samples were then separated using Acclaim PepMap100 C18 capillary column (75 μm id × 150 mm, 2 μm, 100Å, Dionex). The separation of the digests was achieved at 350 nl/min flow rate, using the following gradient: 0–10 min sustaining 5% solvent B (98% ACN with 0.1%FA), 10–65 min ramping solvent B 5–20%, 65–90 min ramping solvent B 20–30%, 90–105 min ramping solvent B 30–50%, 105–106 min ramping solvent B 50–80%, 106–110 min maintaining solvent B at 80%, 110–111 min decreasing solvent B 80–5%, and 111–120 min maintaining solvent B at 5%. Solvent A was a 2% ACN aqueous solution containing 0.1% FA. The separation and scan time were set to 120 min.
The LTQ Orbitrap Velos mass spectrometer was operated with two scan events. The first scan event was a full FTMS scan of 380–2000 m/z with a mass resolution of 15,000 at m/z of 400. The second scan event was collision induced dissociation (CID) MS/MS of parent ions selected from the first scan event with an isolation width of 3.0 m/z. Normalized collision energy was set to 35% with an activation Q value of 0.250 and an activation time of 10 ms. The CID MS/MS was performed on the five most intense ions observed from the first MS scan event.
2.6 LC-MS/MS data analysis
The LC-MS/MS data were analyzed using MaxQuant (version 1.4.1.2) and Scaffold (version Scaffold_3.6.3, Proteome Software Inc., Portland, OR), where the quantitation of proteins was based on ion intensity and spectral count, respectively.
In the MaxQuant analysis, MS/MS spectra were searched against the UniProt human protein database (20,259 protein entries, version of April 23, 2014) using Andromeda. Decoy database of modified reversed protein sequences and 247 common contaminants were also considered in the searching. MaxQuant used an initial searching result for recalibration of masses and retention times, where the mass tolerance of precursor mass and fragment mass used in Andromeda were set as 6 ppm and 0.5 Da, respectively. Carbamidomethylation of cysteine was set as a fixed modification; methionine oxidation and protein N-terminal acetylation were set as variable modifications. Minimal peptide length was set to seven amino acids and at most two missed cleavages were allowed. Only proteins with more than two identified peptides were considered. The false discovery rate (FDR) was set at 0.01 for identification of peptides and proteins. Minimal numbers of razor and unique peptide were both set to one. Uniqueness means a peptide is unique to a single protein group. The “matching-between-runs” feature was enabled and the “label-free quantification” (LFQ) approach with a minimum of two ratio counts was used to compare and normalize protein intensities across runs. This yielded LFQ intensities that were used in the subsequent statistical analysis.
The statistical analysis was performed using Perseus (version 1.4.1.3), an accompanying tool to MaxQuant. Identifications from reversed sequences and contaminants were first removed and only proteins detected in over half of the runs in either case or control group were retained. After the screening, the LFQ intensities were log-transformed and missing value imputation was applied in consideration of the estimated intensity distribution. The most relevant proteins with statistically significant differences between HCC cases and cirrhotic controls were selected using Welch’s test. We calculated p-values with the null hypothesis that means of the two groups (HCC and cirrhosis) are the same. In addition, we used a burden of illness test to identify proteins differentially expressed between the two groups, by taking into account both the mean of the intensity values and the proportion of missing values (set to 0) in the two groups. The p-values associated with the tests were adjusted for multiple testing using the method of Benjamini and Hochberg to control the FDR at a 0.05 level. Proteins with an adjusted p-value <0.05 by either test were selected as candidates for further analysis by MRM.
In the Scaffold analysis, Proteome Discoverer software (version 1.2, Thermo Scientific, San Jose, CA) was used to generate Mascot generic format files (*.mgf), which were subsequently employed for database searching using Mascot (version 2.4.0, Matrix Science, London, UK). Mascot was set up to search the UniProt human protein database. Peptides were searched with a parent ion tolerance of 10 ppm and a fragment ion mass tolerance of 0.8 Da. Trypsin was selected allowing two missed cleavages. Carbamidomethylation of cysteine was set as a fixed modification while oxidation of methionine was set as a variable modification. Scaffold was used to probabilistically assign peptide and protein identifications based on PeptideProphet and ProteinProphet algorithms, respectively. Peptide identifications were accepted with a probability greater than 95%, while protein identifications were accepted with a probability greater than 99% and contained at least two identified peptides. Proteins that contained similar peptides and could not be differentiated based on MS/MS analysis alone were grouped to satisfy the principles of parsimony. Identified proteins were then quantitated based on spectral counting. Missing values were set to 0 prior to subsequent statistical analysis. Proteins with statistically significant differences (p-value <0.05) between HCC cases and cirrhotic controls were selected using t-test.
2.7 Design of MRM transitions for targeted quantitation
In the untargeted LC-MS/MS analysis, candidate protein biomarkers were identified using MaxQuant and Scaffold. We merged the results by both approaches and evaluated these proteins through targeted quantitation by MRM. For each targeted protein, one or two associated peptides were selected using the following rules: (1) identified in the untargeted analysis with a Scaffold probability greater than 95%, (2) completely digested by trypsin, (3) 7-25 amino acid residues, (4) excluding the first 25 amino acids at the N-terminus of proteins, (5) excluding peptides with M, RP, KP and glycosylation site (NXS/T), (6) excluding peptides with ragged ends (tryptic peptides cleaved between R/K, K/R, R/R and K/K), and (7) fixed carbamidomethylation of Cysteine. Next, five transitions of selected peptides were determined using the following rules: (1) precursor ions with charge states of two or three, (2) y series of fragment ions greater than y3 with a charge state of one, (3) the five most intense fragment ions in the MS/MS spectra from untargeted analysis, and (4) m/z values of precursor and transition ions between 300 and 1500.
Prior to MRM scheduling of individual samples, a 1-μl aliquot of each sample was pooled and subjected to MRM experiment to refine the transition list. A 3-μl aliquot of the pooled sample was analyzed by LC-MRM-MS. The expected retention time (RT) of each peptide and its transitions were manually checked using Pinpoint (Thermo Scientific, San Jose, CA) and compared with that in the untargeted analysis to confirm the targeted peptides. Their correlation plots in terms of RT are provided in Supporting Information Figure 1. An RT segment was set to 12 min for each targeted peptide with its expected RT in the center based on the pooled sample analysis. The three most intense transition ions of each peptide were selected as the final transitions. Peptides and transitions were removed from transition list if any of them was not detected in the pooled sample analysis. In total, 101 targeted proteins with 187 peptides and 561 transitions were scheduled and subjected to the LC-MRM-MS experiments. With the abovementioned 12-min RT segment, a minimum 30 ms dwell time was assigned to each transition. A complete list of the MRM transitions used in this study is provided in Supporting Information Table 2.
2.8 LC-MRM-MS data acquisition by targeted analysis
The LC conditions described previously in the untargeted analysis were used here for targeted quantitation by MRM on the TSQ Vantage mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific, San Jose, CA), which was operated in positive mode with an ESI voltage of 1800V. 1.5 μg of serum peptides derived from 0.3 μl of original serum was injected to the LC system. Data independent acquisition mode was used for MRM experiment. Predefined precursor and transition ions were monitored to specifically select targeted peptides corresponding to each candidate protein with 10.0 sec chromatogram filter peak width. The MRM experiments were performed at a cycle time of 5.0 sec and a Q1 peak width (FWHM) of 0.70 Da. The collision energy (CE) value for each targeted peptide is predicted by Pinpoint (CE(+2) = 0.034 * m/z + 3.314(eV), CE(+3) = 0.044 * m/z + 3.314(eV)) with a collision gas pressure of 1.5 mTorr in Q2.
2.9 LC-MRM-MS data analysis
The LC-MRM-MS data were analyzed using Skyline (version 2.5.0.6079). Peptide search results from Andromeda, i.e., msms.txt and mqpar.xml, were used to recognize the monitored transitions from LC-MRM-MS data. The Skyline determined the RT location and integration boundaries for each peptide in each run independently. By comparing the same peptide across runs, we adjusted the RT location and integration boundaries to exclude interfering regions. We selected the peak closest to the RT center of segment if multiple peaks were detected. Each protein’s intensity was quantitated using the summation of intensities from its corresponding transitions. The difference between total area and background was assigned to quantify a transition. Prior to the statistical analysis, the quantitated protein intensities were log-transformed and normalized by the summed intensity. The most relevant proteins with differential abundance between HCC cases and cirrhotic controls were selected using t-test, and the associated p-values were adjusted based on multiple testing correction (FDR <0.05).