ABSTRACT:
Background
Lung cancer is the leading cause of cancer mortality in the United States. Non-small cell lung cancer accounts for 85% of all lung cancers for which adenocarcinoma is the most common histological type. Management of lung cancer is hindered by high false-positive rates due to difficulty resolving between benign and malignant tumors. Better molecular analysis comparing malignant and non-malignant tissues will provide important evidence of the underlying biology contributing to tumorigenesis.
Methods
We utilized a proteomics approach to analyze 38 malignant and non-malignant paired tissue samples obtained from current or former smokers with early stage (Stage IA/IB) lung adenocarcinoma. Statistical mixed effects modeling and orthogonal partial least squares discriminant analysis were used to identify key cancer-associated perturbations in the adenocarcinoma proteome. Identified proteins were subsequently assessed against clinicopathological variables.
Results
Top cancer-associated protein alterations were characterized by: (1) elevations in APEX1, HYOU1 and PDIA4, indicative of increased DNA repair machinery and heightened anti-oxidant defense mechanisms; (2) increased LRPPRC, STOML2, COPG1 and EPRS, suggesting altered tumor metabolism and inflammation; (3) reductions in SPTB, SPTA1 and ANK1 implying dysregulation of membrane integrity; and (4) decreased SLCA41 suggesting altered pH regulation. Increased protein levels of HYOU1, EPRS and LASP1 in NSCLC adenocarcinoma was independently validated by tissue microarray immunohistochemistry. Immunohistochemistry for HYOU1 and EPRS indicated AUCs of 0.952 and 0.841, respectively, for classifying tissue as malignant. Increased LASP1 correlated with poor overall survival (HR 3.66 per unit increase; CI 1.37–9.78; p = 0.01).
Conclusion
These results reveal distinct proteomic changes associated with early stage lung adenocarcinoma that may be useful prognostic indicators and therapeutic targets.
Electronic supplementary material
The online version of this article (doi:10.1186/s12014-016-9132-y) contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.
METHODS:
Methods
Sample acquisition
De-identified malignant and adjacent non-malignant lung tissue samples were harvested in the operating room from patients having resection or lobectomy for non-small cell lung cancer, none of whom received preoperative treatment. The matching control lung tissue was always taken from areas 8–10 cm removed from the cancer bed. All procedures were approved by institutional IRB protocols (NYU) with patient consent. Tissues were immediately frozen in liquid nitrogen and stored at −80 °C. Specimens were annotated for age, gender, race, diagnosis (including stage), smoking status and pack-years. Criteria used to select patient cases were: (a) current or former smokers; (b) diagnosis of NSCLC adenocarcinoma; (c) early stage IA or IB; and (d) understood and signed the IRB consent form. Of the 38 samples analyzed in the study, 14 (36.8%) were from patients that had recurrent cancer within 5 years. The inclusion of these 14 subjects was to identify potential prognostic biomarkers of early stage adenocarcinoma.
Proteomic analysis
Preparation of samples for proteomic analysis
Preparation of tissues and N-glycan release followed by ethanol precipitation of tissue proteins has been previously described in Ruhaak et al..
Trypsin digestion of samples
Protein pellets were solubilized in 100 µL of AMBIC (6 M urea, 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate) with dithiothreitol added (final concentration 5 mM) and incubated at 37 °C for 30 min. Iodoacetamide (IAA) was added (final concentration 15 mM), incubated for 30 min (RT) and DTT added to quench the IAA reaction. Lys-C/trypsin (Promega) was next added (1:25 enzyme:protein ratio), samples incubated (4 h at 37 °C) after which the urea concentration was lowered (<1 M) and samples further digested (overnight, 37 °C). Samples were desalted (C18 Macro Spin columns, Nest Group) and lyophilized.
LC–MS/MS analysis
Reconstituted samples were randomized into 8 blocks of 4 normal and 4 tumor samples. Triplicate LC–MS/MS analyses were acquired for each sample. LC separation was done on a Waters Nano Acquity UHPLC (Waters Corporation) with a Proxeon nanospray source. Mass spectra was collected on an Orbitrap Q Exactive Plus mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific) in a data-dependent mode with one MS precursor scan followed by 15 MS/MS scans as previously described. Detailed information on instrument parameters and mass spectra collection is provided in the Additional file 1: Supplemental materials and methods (1a). The mass spectrometry proteomics data have been deposited to the ProteomeXchange Consortium via the PRIDE partner repository with the dataset identifier PXD002612.
Protein identification
Protein identification was performed similarly to Zhang et al.. Detailed information can be found in Additional file 1: Supplemental materials and methods (1b).
Immunohistochemistry of lung cancer LC003 TMA
Preparation of LC003 TMA
A tissue microarray (LC003) was prepared from FFPE tissue blocks containing non-malignant and malignant (tumor) tissues obtained from 40 patients diagnosed with early stage (Stage I and II) NSCLC adenocarcinoma after patient consent using an IRB approved protocol (IRB 293828, UC Davis Cancer Center Biorepository). Three 0.6 mm (diameter) by 0.4 mm (length) cylindrical cores of tumor and adjacent non-malignant (control) lung tissues were collected from each case and placed in the same block (Quick-Ray Manual Tissue Microarrayer). One TMA section was stained with H&E (hematoxylin and eosin) to confirm the presence of tumor and normal lung tissue. Clinical data (gender, age, smoking history, diagnosis and stage) information was provided after analysis.
Immunohistochemistry of LC003 TMA
Immunohistochemical staining was performed on 4-μm FFPE tissue sections from the LC003 TMA for three different protein targets, HYOU1, EPRS and LASP1. Details of the IHC procedure are provided in Additional file 1: Supplemental materials and methods (1c).
Immunostained slides were scored by a pathologist (YZ) blinded to clinicopathologic information. Staining for HYOU, EPRS and LASP1 was semi-quantified assessed using both intensity and percentage of positive cells. Staining intensity was graded as 0 = negative (no cells stained); 1 = weak; 2 = moderate; 3 = strong. The H score was calculated by multiplying the percentage of positive cells demonstrating each density (score 0 to 3) and adding the results. The average H score of 3 cores in a case was calculated. High expression was defined as H score 251–300; medium expression was H score 151–250; low expression was H score less than 150.
Statistical analysis
Detailed information on statistical analyses are provided in Additional file 1: Supplemental Materials and methods (1d). A conservative approach was used to overview data quality metrics in order to identify the most robust proteomic measurements for downstream statistical and multivariate analyses. A total of 799 high quality protein measurements (spectral counts) based on absence of abundant missing zeros, replicate precision, protein sequence coverage and annotation to known genes were selected for further statistical and multivariate analyses.
Statistical analyses were conducted on mean normalized count data. Statistical tests were conducted using generalized negative binomial mixed effects regression with the patients as the random term. Significantly altered proteins were identified based on the comparison of the full model (Chi squared test) including age + gender + packs + tumor/control to a reduced model excluding the tumor/normal labels. Model p-values were adjusted for multiple hypotheses tested.
Orthogonal partial least squares discriminant analysis (O-PLS-DA) multivariate models were used to identify the top 10% of all protein discriminants between tumor and control tissues as previously described.
A Gaussian graphical model protein–protein empirical network was calculated for O-PLS-DA selected top discriminants (n = 16) as previously described.
All subjects were included in the survival analysis with the exception of six subjects who did not die of lung cancer 23–2262 days from their surgery, and who, before their death, never had recurrent lung cancer. Kaplan–Meier survival curves were generated using Prism v5.0 (GraphPad Software, Inc). Significance was determined using log-rank Mantel-Cox test. Cox proportional hazard models were carried out in R statistical software.
LASP1 transcriptomic data
 LASP1 transcriptomic data was obtained from the Okayama NSCLC study using the Oncomine Database. The study set was chosen due its specific focus on early stage NSCLC adenocarcinoma and availability of clinicopathological variables. Only Stage I (IA/IB) adenocarcinoma subjects were considered. Subject characteristics are provided in Additional file 1: Table S5. LASP1 values were log2-median centered normalized. Cox proportional hazard models were used to evaluate the association between LASP1 mRNA expression and overall survival.