ABSTRACT:
Background
Sexually deceptive orchids of the genus Ophrys mimic the mating signals of their pollinator females to attract males as pollinators. This mode of pollination is highly specific and leads to strong reproductive isolation between species. This study aims to identify candidate genes responsible for pollinator attraction and reproductive isolation between three closely related species, O. exaltata, O. sphegodes and O. garganica. Floral traits such as odour, colour and morphology are necessary for successful pollinator attraction. In particular, different odour hydrocarbon profiles have been linked to differences in specific pollinator attraction among these species. Therefore, the identification of genes involved in these traits is important for understanding the molecular basis of pollinator attraction by sexually deceptive orchids.
Results
We have created floral reference transcriptomes and proteomes for these three Ophrys species using a combination of next-generation sequencing (454 and Solexa), Sanger sequencing, and shotgun proteomics (tandem mass spectrometry). In total, 121 917 unique transcripts and 3531 proteins were identified. This represents the first orchid proteome and transcriptome from the orchid subfamily Orchidoideae. Proteome data revealed proteins corresponding to 2644 transcripts and 887 proteins not observed in the transcriptome. Candidate genes for hydrocarbon and anthocyanin biosynthesis were represented by 156 and 61 unique transcripts in 20 and 7 genes classes, respectively. Moreover, transcription factors putatively involved in the regulation of flower odour, colour and morphology were annotated, including Myb, MADS and TCP factors.
Conclusion
Our comprehensive data set generated by combining transcriptome and proteome technologies allowed identification of candidate genes for pollinator attraction and reproductive isolation among sexually deceptive orchids. This includes genes for hydrocarbon and anthocyanin biosynthesis and regulation, and the development of floral morphology. These data will serve as an invaluable resource for research in orchid floral biology, enabling studies into the molecular mechanisms of pollinator attraction and speciation.
METHODS:
Materials and Methods
Plant Materials
Plant material of O. exaltata subsp. archipelagi (Gölz & Reinhard) Del Prete, O. garganica Nelson, and O. sphegodes Miller for 454 sequencing was grown in a greenhouse at the Botanic Garden of the University of Zurich, Switzerland. Additional flower labellum samples of these three species were used for proteome analysis and two further O. sphegodes flower labella for EST library and Illumina Solexa sequencing, all of these samples being from different plants. All flowers used in this study were unpollinated. Plant tissues were collected, flash-frozen in liquid nitrogen and stored at −80°C until RNA or protein extraction. For 454 sequencing, the following tissues were used: leaves, bracts, labella, sepals, petals and columns, both from open flowers and flower buds from all developmental stages available on the sampled plants, the smallest available bud being five positions from the latest open flower on the inflorescence.
cDNA Normalisation and 454 Sequencing
Total RNA was extracted separately from different tissues (see above) collected from three different individual plants per species (21 RNA samples/species) using TRIzol® reagent (Invitrogen) and the supplier’s protocol. Extracts were further purified by using RNeasy MinElute Cleanup columns (Qiagen) according to the manufacturer’s protocol. The extracted RNAs were analysed for potential degradation by gel electrophoresis and on a Bioanalyzer 2100 (Agilent), and RNA concentration was quantified using the fluorometric Qubit Quantitation Platform (Invitrogen). Equal amounts of RNA from each biological individual were pooled to yield one RNA sample for each Ophrys species. To avoid genomic DNA contamination, RNA was treated with RNase-free DNase I (Qiagen). Full-length double-stranded cDNA was synthesised from 0.5 µg pooled total RNA using SMARTer PCR cDNA Synthesis Kit (Clontech, Palo Alto, CA, USA) according to the manufacturer’s instructions. To enhance gene discovery, the contribution of highly abundant transcripts was reduced before sequencing. To do so, 1 µg of each cDNA was normalised using the Trimmer cDNA Normalization Kit (Evrogen, Moscow, Russia), according to the manufacturer’s instructions.
Approximately 500 ng of normalised cDNA of each sample were used to generate a single strand cDNA transcriptome library for the Roche/454 Life Sciences GS-FLX Titanium platform (Roche, Basel, Switzerland) following the Rapid Library Preparation Method Manual. Briefly, cDNA of each sample was sheared by nebulisation to produce fragments of approximately 300–400 bp, and oligonucleotide adapters were ligated to the fragmented cDNA. One adapter contained a barcode sequence that was used to discriminate the samples (i.e. species) from each other after sequencing, as all libraries were combined in a single pool. Transcriptome library sequencing was then performed according to the Roche GS-FLX XLR70 Titanium emPCR and sequencing manuals. The pooled sample was sequenced on a full picotitre plate on a Genome Sequencer FLX Instrument, according to the manufacturer’s instructions, at the Functional Genomics Centre Zurich, Switzerland.
EST Library Preparation and Sequencing
Poly (A)+ RNA was purified from 2 µg O. sphegodes flower labellum total RNA using the Oligotex mRNA isolation kit (Qiagen AG, Hombrechtikon, Switzerland) according to the manufacturer’s instructions. One standard cDNA library was prepared using the Creator SMART cDNA Library Construction Kit and the protocol provided, except that insert size selection was performed using Zymoclean Gel DNA Recovery Kit (Zymo Research, Orange, CA, USA). Oligo-dT-primed cDNA inserts larger than 1 kb were directionally cloned in pDNR-LIB vector (Clontech, Palo Alto, CA, USA) and transformed into XL-10 Gold Kan+ ultracompetent Escherichia coli (Stratagene, LaJolla, CA, USA). Colony PCR reactions were performed to test the library efficiency and insert size range. The library was stored by the addition of glycerol (20% v/v final concentration) and sent for Sanger sequencing (Applied Biosystems) at the Purdue University sequencing platform, West Lafayette, Indiana (USA).
Illumina Solexa Sequencing
Total RNA of one O. sphegodes flower labellum was used for an RNA-Seq experiment by Illumina Solexa sequencing at BGI Shenzhen (China), following Illumina’s sample preparation guidelines. Briefly, poly(A)+ was purified from total RNA and fragmented, cDNA synthesised and adapters ligated. After size selection, cDNA was subjected to Solexa paired-end sequencing on an Illumina Genome Analyzer II generating 75 nt long reads.
Processing of Sequence Reads
For Sanger reads, base calling, masking of vector sequences and low quality ends were done with phred (version 071220) via the phredPhrap script (version 080818) in consed (version 20.0), and trimming of poly-A/T tails with seqclean (http://compbio.dfci.harvard.edu/tgi/software/). Raw Solexa reads were filtered by quality using the manufacturer’s software and default parameters. Raw 454 sequencing data was obtained with the GS Run Processor 2.5.3 (Roche) using shotgun quality filtering and trimming as defined by the default settings. Raw 454 reads were first trimmed of adapter sequences used in cDNA library preparation and normalisation with newbler in the Roche 454 Software Suite 2.5.3 (454 Life Science, Branford, CT). MEGABLAST 2.2.21 was run to ascertain that trimmed reads were clean of any adapter and primer sequences. Trimmed 454 reads were further processed with seqclean to remove low complexity and low quality reads, and to remove any left-over poly-A/T tails.
Transcriptome Assembly
 O. sphegodes Solexa reads were first assembled into contigs using SOAPdenovo, using paired-end information to link contigs into scaffolds, and where possible, to fill gaps with reads. Scaffolds were clustered using TGICL, each cluster producing one or more consensus sequences; unclustered scaffolds were termed singleton contigs. O. sphegodes Sanger reads and 454 reads from all three species were both (1) assembled separately for each species and (2) pooled and assembled with 454 newbler 2.5.3 (454 Life Science, Branford, CT). The pooled assembly was further merged with the O. sphegodes Solexa assembly using minimus2 under the criteria of minimum 40 bases overlap with at least 94% identity. The merged assembly from Sanger, 454 and Solexa data is referred to as the Ophrys reference transcriptome.
Transcriptome Annotation and Analysis
Assembled sequences and singleton reads were compared to the NCBI non-redundant (nr) database using BLASTX. Based on the search results, Gene Ontology (GO) term annotation was performed to predict the function of the sequences using BLAST2GO software. Enzyme commission (EC) number and Kyoto Encyclopaedia of Genes and Genomes (KEGG) pathway were inferred from GO annotations using the same software. Moreover, GO, EC and KEGG annotation was also done with annot8r based on BLASTX results from searches against the UniProt database. Orthologous genes (KOG annotation) were identified by searching against the NCBI KOG database using RPSTBLASTN 2.2.26. Coding regions were predicted using ESTScan 3.0.3 and then compared to the Pfam protein domain database using pfam_scan 1.3.
Read Mapping
Read mapping was performed for purposes of data set cross-validation. Solexa reads were mapped onto 454/Sanger singleton reads using Bowtie 0.12.7 (parameters: ‘-n 1 -l 35 -e 100 -m 5–best –strata’) as independent evidence for singleton reads. 454 reads were mapped back on the reference transcriptome using the BWA-SW algorithm in BWA 0.5.9 (with parameter ‘-s 5′).
Identification of Candidate Genes
 A priori candidate genes were identified by homology to genes of known or putative function in model organisms. To identify hydrocarbon and anthocyanin biosynthetic genes, a BLASTN search of the Ophrys reference transcriptome against Arabidopsis thaliana TAIR10 coding sequences was performed (at e-value of<E-03), retaining information of the best BLAST hit for each orchid transcript. Homologues of Arabidopsis genes for selected gene classes were considered candidate genes. In addition, text/term searches of BLAST/NR best hits, GO annotations and EC numbers were used to identify candidate orchid genes. For transcription factor identification, KOG searches for transcription terms were performed alongside BLAST searches against A. thaliana and Oryza sativa TF databases publically available from PlantTFDB 2.0 (which currently does not contain sequences from Asparagales). TFs of special interest, putatively involved in the regulation of VLCFA, anthocyanin biosynthesis and flower morphology, were identified from the literature.
Shotgun Proteomics
Frozen labellum tissue of an unpollinated flower from each study species was ground to powder without allowing it to thaw, and resuspended in 150 µL urea protein extraction buffer (65 mM Tris-HCl, 8 M urea, 10% glycerol, 5% β-mercaptoethanol, 2% SDS, 0.025% bromophenol blue), denatured and separated by SDS-PAGE, sliced (13 gel slices per sample) and trypsinised as described previously. Proteins were subjected to electrospray ionisation-based LC-MS/MS analysis with a 2D linear ion trap Finnigan LTQ (Thermo Electron Corporation), equipped with an Ultimate Nano HPLC System (Dionex Corporation) exactly as described by Grobei et al..
Proteome Analysis
MS/MS-derived spectra were searched against different peptide databases using Mascot Search Engine version 2.3 (Matrix Science Ltd., UK). The databases used were SwissProt and TAIR9, including decoys and known contaminants (as in Grobei et al. 2009), and (1) orchid peptides predicted by ESTScan and (2) a 6-frame translation of the orchid transcriptome. Mascot searches, with a peptide mass tolerance of 3 Da, allowed for one trypsin miscleavage, for Met oxidation and Cys carbamidomethylation, and were further analysed and validated in R 2.14.2 and Scaffold 3.3 (Proteome Software Inc., USA), which uses the Peptide-Prophet and Protein-Prophet algorithms. Spectra from known contaminants were removed from the data set for final analysis.