ABSTRACT:
SUMMARY
Aging has been associated with a progressive decline of proteostasis, but how this process manifests itself at the level of proteome composition remains largely unexplored. Here we profiled more than 5,000 proteins along the lifespan of the nematode C. elegans. We find that one third of proteins change in abundance at least 2-fold during aging, resulting in a severe proteome imbalance. These changes are reduced in the long-lived daf-2 mutant, but enhanced in the short-lived daf-16 mutant. While ribosomal proteins decline and lose normal stoichiometry, proteasome complexes increase. Proteome imbalance is accompanied by widespread protein aggregation, with abundant proteins that exceed solubility contributing most to aggregate load. Notably, the properties by which proteins are selected for aggregation differ in the daf-2 mutant, and an increased formation of aggregates associated with small heat shock proteins is observed. We suggest that sequestering proteins into chaperone-enriched aggregates is a protective strategy to slow proteostasis decline during nematode aging.
METHODS:
EXPERIMENTAL PROCEDURES
C. elegans Strains and Growth Conditions
A list of strains used in this study is provided in Extended Experimental Procedures. The Bristol strain N2 was used as wild-type. The L4 larval stage was considered as day 0. Bacterial cultures (ET505) for SILAC labeling were grown in 13C6-14N2-lysine (heavy lysine) containing M63 minimal media (see Extended Experimental Procedures for details).
Sample Preparation for Total Proteome Measurements
Briefly, worms were suspended in lysis buffer (4% SDS, 0.1 M Tris/HCl pH 8.0, 1 mM EDTA), incubated at 95°C for 5 min and further treated by ultra-sonication. Typically, an aliquot of lysate containing 40 μg of protein was mixed with an equal amount of a heavy lysine labeled lysate pool (Figure S1A). Proteins were reduced, alkylated and digested with endoproteinase LysC using the FASP method. Peptide mixtures were either analyzed without fractionation or after fractionation by isoelectric focusing, as described in Extended Experimental Procedures.
Isolation of Protein Aggregates
Worms were resuspended in lysis buffer (50 mM Tris/HCl pH 8.0, 0.5 M NaCl, 4 mM EDTA, 1% (v/v) Igepal CA630, Complete proteinase inhibitor cocktail; Roche Diagnostics), disrupted by sonication and clarified by low-speed centrifugation (1 min, 1,000 rcf). Insoluble proteins were sedimented by ultracentrifugation (500,000 rcf at 4°C, 10 min), washed twice with lysis buffer containing 0.15 M NaCl and 0.5% sodium deoxycholate, and solubilized in SDS sample buffer for 10 min at 95°C. For quantitative proteome measurements of aggregated proteins, an aliquot of pooled total lysate from heavy lysine labeled animals was added prior to ultracentrifugation. For experiments measuring aggregation propensities, unlabeled worm lysates were first fractionated and subsequently supplemented with SILAC-labeled whole cell lysate.
Mass Spectrometry and Data Analysis
Peptides were separated by reversed phase nano-HPLC and sprayed online into LTQ-Orbitrap XL, LTQ-Orbitrap Velos or Orbitrap-Elite mass spectrometers (Thermo Fisher). In each scan cycle, fragmentation spectra of the 10 most intense peptide precursors in the survey scan were acquired in the higher-energy collisional dissociation (HCD) mode. Raw data was processed using the MaxQuant software environment and peak lists were searched with Andromeda against a database containing the translation of all predicted proteins listed in Uniprot (release January 15, 2012) as well as a list of commonly observed contaminants and the NCBI protein database of E. coli strain K12. The minimal required peptide length was set to seven amino acids and both protein and peptide identifications were accepted at a false discovery rate of 1%. To identify aggregation-prone proteins that were significantly affected by aging, those proteins that were quantified in at least 3 out of 4 biological replicate experiments at day 1 and day 12 were subjected to a Welch’s t-test and filtered based on a 5% permutation-based false discovery rate threshold.
Miscellaneous
Proteasome activity assays, detection of polyQ aggregates by SDD-AGE, light microscopy and methods used for bioinformatic analyses are described in Extended Experimental Procedures.