ABSTRACT:
Prokaryotes, due to their moderate complexity, are particularly amenable to the comprehensive identification of the protein repertoire expressed under different conditions. We applied a generic strategy to identify a complete expressed prokaryotic proteome, which is based on the analysis of RNA and proteins extracted from matched samples. Saturated transcriptome profiling by RNA-seq provided an endpoint estimate of the protein-coding genes expressed under two conditions which mimic the interaction of Bartonella henselae with its mammalian host. Directed shotgun proteomics experiments were carried out on four subcellular fractions. By specifically targeting proteins which are short, basic, low abundant, and membrane localized, we could eliminate their initial underrepresentation compared to the estimated endpoint. A total of 1250 proteins were identified with an estimated false discovery rate below 1%. This represents 85% of all distinct annotated proteins and ∼90% of the expressed protein-coding genes. Genes that were detected at the transcript but not protein level, were found to be highly enriched in several genomic islands. Furthermore, genes that lacked an ortholog and a functional annotation were not detected at the protein level; these may represent examples of overprediction in genome annotations. A dramatic membrane proteome reorganization was observed, including differential regulation of autotransporters, adhesins, and hemin binding proteins. Particularly noteworthy was the complete membrane proteome coverage, which included expression of all members of the VirB/D4 type IV secretion system, a key virulence factor.
METHODS:
Methods
Bacterial growth and subcellular fractionation
The B. henselae strain MQB307 harbors a deletion of the response regulator batR (BH00620) and its cognate sensor histidine kinase batS (BH00610) and carries a plasmid-encoded copy of batR under the control of an IPTG-inducible promoter (for details, see Supplemental Methods; Supplemental Tables S1, S2). MQB307 was grown on Columbia blood agar (CBA) plates supplemented with 30 mg/L kanamycin with (induced condition) or without (uninduced condition) 500 μM IPTG at 35°C and 5% CO2 for 60 h. The subcellular fractionation was performed as previously described (; Supplemental Methods). To maximize the recovery of membrane proteins, the total membrane fraction (TM) was further separated into inner membrane (IM) and outer membrane (OM) fraction.
RNA extraction and whole transcriptome sequencing
RNA was isolated from bacterial cells as described. Whole transcriptome libraries were produced using the RiboMinus Bacterial Transcriptome Isolation Kit (Life Technologies), and the SOLiD Total RNA-seq kit (Applied Biosystems). Briefly, cDNA libraries were size-selected and amplified for 18 cycles of PCR. The whole transcriptome library was used for emulsion-PCR based on a concentration of 0.5 pM. Sequencing beads were pooled and loaded on a full SOLiD-4 slide; between 55–87 million 50-base sequencing reads were generated per library (Supplemental Table S3). For details, see Supplemental Methods.
RNA-seq data processing and transcriptome coverage analysis
The sequenced reads were mapped to the genome sequence of the B. henselae Houston-1 strain using the BioScope 1.3.1 mapping pipeline. Among all uniquely mapping reads, those of lower quality were removed (for more detail, see Supplemental Methods; Supplemental Fig. S12). The count data summary for annotated B. henselae ORFs was generated using the HTSeq package. To create Figure 2A, the filtered reads were shuffled and sequentially mapped to the genome; a protein-coding ORF was classified as expressed when accumulating five or more distinct reads in the 5′ end of the ORF. Based on this data, nonlinear regression models were constructed to estimate the effect of doubling the number of reads. For details, see Supplemental Methods.
Protein and peptide fractionation and mass spectrometry
The subcellular fractions (Cytu/i, TMu/i, IMu/i, OMu/i) were further fractionated biochemically, including OFFGEL electrophoresis at the protein (OGEprot) and peptide level (OGEpep), and size exclusion chromatography (SEC, “gel filtration”). To enrich for low-abundance proteins, we used the ProteoMiner approach. More detail on the biochemical fractionations, digest conditions, and the mass spectrometry set-up is given in the Supplemental Methods and in Supplemental Figure S13. Samples were injected into a NanoLC HPLC system (Eksigent Technologies) by an autosampler, separated on a self-made reverse-phase tip column packed with C18 material, and acquired on an LTQ Orbitrap XL or LTQ FT Ultra mass spectrometer (both Thermo Scientific).
Database searching and data processing
To minimize the chance for false positive assignments, spectra were searched against a combined database (1488 B. henselae proteins, 3336 sheep proteins, a positive control [myc-gfp], and sequences of 256 common contaminants [keratins, trypsin, etc.]) either with Mascot (version 2.3.0, Matrix Science) or with MS-GF+ (MS-GFDB v7747). For Mascot, data were further post-processed with Percolator. Based on the target-decoy search approach, a Percolator/MS-GF+ score cutoff was determined that resulted in an estimated 0.01% FDR at the PSM level. All PSMs above this cutoff were classified with the PeptideClassifier software, and only peptides (tryptic or semitryptic) that unambiguously imply one bacterial protein sequence were considered (Table 1). For details, see Supplemental Methods.
ADE analysis
Exponential curves were fitted to each block of experiments with a shared biochemical fractionation regimen to find a saturation threshold (Fig. 3A). We then used this fit to predict the saturation beyond the point of experimentally observed PSMs for each biochemical fractionation regimen (Fig. 3A, dashed lines). For details on the exponential model, approximating confidence bands, density estimation of physicochemical parameters, and computation of physicochemical parameters and other protein sequence features, see Supplemental Methods.
Statistical analysis
Statistical tests were performed using the statistical software R 2.15.2 (www.R-project.org). All reported P-values are from hypergeometric tests and are adjusted for multiple testing controlling the corresponding FDR. Significance is based on an alpha level of 5%.
Transcript and protein abundance estimation
Transcript abundance was estimated via RPKM values calculated similar to. The sum of mapped and filtered reads per gene was divided by its length (in kilobases) and the sum of reads for all B. henselae protein-coding genes (in million reads). Relative protein abundance (in ppm) (see Supplemental Fig. S6C) was estimated based on spectral counts as described.
Orthologs, sequence repeats, and functional protein classification
Orthologous genes conserved in B. henselae, B. tribocorum, and B. grahamii were taken from. To find duplicated regions of 50 nt or longer in the B. henselae genome, we used RepSeek (version 6.5). For functional protein classification, we relied on the eggNOG resource (http://eggnog.embl.de). For details, see Supplemental Methods.
Differential expression analysis
Differential transcript and protein expression analysis was carried out with the R package DESeq (version 1.6.1). Our description of condition-specific complete expressed proteomes precluded the analysis of biological replicates. Since DESeq ranks proteins according to statistical significance, i.e., the top-ranked proteins are observed by many spectra, we minimized the potential to erroneously identify differentially expressed proteins by chance. On the other hand, without replicates, we lack the power to detect lower expressed, truly differentially regulated proteins.
Data access
RNA-seq data have been submitted to the NCBI Genome Expression Omnibus (GEO; http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/geo/) under the GEO Series accession number GSE44564. Proteomics data associated with this manuscript can be downloaded from ProteomeXchange (http://proteomecentral.proteomexchange.org/) under accession number PXD000153.
[Supplemental material is available for this article.]
Article published online before print. Article, supplemental material, and publication date are at http://www.genome.org/cgi/doi/10.1101/gr.151035.112.