ABSTRACT:
Proteomics data can supplement genome annotation efforts, for example being used to confirm gene models or correct gene annotation errors. Here, we present a large-scale proteogenomics study of two important apicomplexan pathogens: Toxoplasma gondii and Neospora caninum. We queried proteomics data against a panel of official and alternate gene models generated directly from RNASeq data, using several newly generated and some previously published MS datasets for this meta-analysis. We identified a total of 201 996 and 39 953 peptide-spectrum matches for T. gondii and N. caninum, respectively, at a 1% peptide FDR threshold. This equated to the identification of 30 494 distinct peptide sequences and 2921 proteins (matches to official gene models) for T. gondii, and 8911 peptides/1273 proteins for N. caninum following stringent protein-level thresholding. We have also identified 289 and 140 loci for T. gondii and N. caninum, respectively, which mapped to RNA-Seq-derived gene models used in our analysis and apparently absent from the official annotation (release 10 from EuPathDB) of these species. We present several examples in our study where the RNA-Seq evidence can help in correction of the current gene model and can help in discovery of potential new genes. The findings of this study have been integrated into the EuPathDB. The data have been deposited to the ProteomeXchange with identifiers PXD000297and PXD000298.
METHODS:
2 Materials and methods
2.1 Sample preparation and datasets
2.1.1 Toxoplasma gondii datasets
Datasets of RH strain of T. gondii 1DE, 1DE of soluble and insoluble fractions (1DE SFIF), 2DE, and multidimensional protein identification technology (MudPIT) were created for a previously published T. gondii proteomics study. Briefly, for 1DE, 1DE SFIF, and 2DE, T. gondii RH tachyzoites were separated either by 1D SDS-PAGE on a 12% v/v acrylamide gel or 2DE using pH 4–7 linear gradient and pH 3–10 nonlinear gradient strips. In total, 129 contiguous gel slices from the1DE experiment, 50 contiguous gel slices from the 1DE SFIF experiment, and 1217 gel spots from the 2DE experiments were collected and digested with trypsin. The peptide mixtures were then analyzed on an LC-MS/MS platform—an LTQ ion trap mass spectrometer (Thermo-Electron, Hemel Hempstead, UK) coupled online to a Dionex Ultimate 3000 (Dionex Company, Amsterdam, The Netherlands) HPLC system. For the T. gondii MudPIT experiment, five tris-soluble replicates and four tris-insoluble samples of T. gondii RH tachyzoite were each subjected to MudPIT analysis using a quaternary Agilent 1100 series HPLC coupled to an LTQ-ion trap mass spectrometer (Thermo, San Jose, CA, USA) with a nano-LC ESI source. Datasets of T. gondii “Orbitrap whole cell lysate” and “Orbitrap 1DE” were newly created for this study using previously published sample preparation and MS protocols. These datasets were generated from RH parasites in order to be consistent with the previously published datasets. In the “Orbitrap whole cell lysate” experiment, T. gondii RH tachyzoite proteins were solubilized and tryptically digested. In the Orbitrap 1DE experiment, T. gondii RH tachyzoites were separated by 1D SDS-PAGE on a 12% v/v acrylamide gel, from which 16 gel bands were excised and digested with trypsin. The digests were then pooled into eight samples for LC-MS/MS analysis. Peptide mixtures from both experiments were analyzed by online nanoflow LC using the nanoACQUITY-nLC system (Waters MS technologies, Manchester, UK) coupled to an LTQ-Orbitrap Velos (ThermoFisher Scientific, Bremen, Germany) mass spectrometer equipped with the manufacturer's nanospray ion source.
2.1.2 Neospora caninum datasets
Datasets of N. caninum Orbitrap 1DE and Orbitrap 1DE-2 were collected from N. caninum LIV strain tachyzoites using the similar protocol described in T. gondii datasets. Briefly, 8 and 14 gel slices were, respectively, excised from Orbitrap 1DE and Orbitrap 1DE-2 experiments. Samples were then tryptically digested and analyzed by online nanoflow LC using the nanoACQUITY-nLC system (Waters MS technologies) coupled to an LTQ-Orbitrap Velos (ThermoFisher Scientific) mass spectrometer equipped with the manufacturer's nanospray ion source.
It is important to note that all datasets were generated from single life cycle stages of the parasites, where not all proteins are expected to be expressed.
2.2 Proteogenomic analysis pipeline
The proteogenomics analysis of the above dataset was performed by an automated software pipeline, the ProteoAnnotator (http://www.proteoannotator.org/), developed in our group. ProteoAnnotator is an open-source, platform-independent, toolkit for proteogenomics, which is compliant with formats from the Proteomics Standards Initiative. The pipeline starts with genomic coordinates for gene models (GFF3 (generic file)) format, and mass spectra in MGF (MASCOT Generic) format. ProteoAnnotator embeds open-source search engines OMSSA and X!Tandem, which are accessed via the SearchGUI wrapper. Postprocessing is performed to control for FDR at the peptide level, followed by a bespoke protein inference algorithm/scoring approach, which is able to score the strength of evidence for improvements to gene models at a given locus and assemble peptides into protein groups. For general identifications of protein groups—1% FDR is implemented. For (protein group) identifications that suggest improvements to the current gene models, 5% FDR threshold is applied—as discussed in the ProteoAnnotator publication.
2.3 MS/MS search parameters
2.3.1 Search parameters
The search parameters for all the datasets were fixed modification of carbamidomethylation of cysteine, variable modification of acetylation of the protein n-terminus, pyro-glu from n-terminal E, pyro-glu from n-terminal Q, and oxidation of methionine. A double missed trypsin cleavage was allowed. The product tolerance was set as ±0.5 Da and the precursor tolerance as 5 ppm and ±0.5 Da for Orbitrap and LTQ, respectively.
2.3.2 Gene models
The MS data for T. gondii and N. caninum were searched against the protein database assembled from two different sources: the official gene models and predicted gene models supported by RNA-Seq evidences. The official gene models (release 10 - January 30, 2014) were obtained from EuPathDB. The gene model for T. gondii was obtained from http://toxodb.org/common/downloads/release-10.0/TgondiiME49/gff/data/ and the N. caninum official model was obtained from http://toxodb.org/common/downloads/release-10.0/NcaninumLIV/gff/data/. At the time of submission of this manuscript, the latest official gene models are available as release 12 (September 10, 2014). However, releases 10 and 12 are identical in terms of protein counts and sequences. The RNA-Seq-assisted alternate gene model was generated using a version of CRAIG (default parameters) that integrates RNA-Seq data available at http://toxodb.org/. The RNA-Seq data were encoded as features derived from the genomic mapping of RNA-Seq read libraries as performed by GSNAP version 2013-08-19 (default parameters) [53]. Following the same basic strategy as in, we obtained a set of gene predictions for each existing library. We sought completeness by forcing CRAIG to predict at least one gene model for each biologically significant junction. Junctions with conflicting evidence, that is junctions that overlap other junctions, are deemed biologically significant when their support is at least 20% of the highest support found in any overlapping junction. Junctions with no conflicts are biologically significant when they are supported by at least three reads mapping to the region. The RNA-Seq compliant version of CRAIG is unpublished at the time of preparing this manuscript, but the binaries for the current version are available at http://roos8core.bio.upenn.edu/∼abernal/craig/craig-2.1.tar.gz. The search database was prepared by concatenating these gene models to the official gene models. The database was further appended by decoy sequences with a target–decoy ratio of 1:1 to create a final search database for performing the MS/MS searches. We have provided these databases in the ProteomeXchange submissions.
2.3.3 Functional analysis
Sequences from identified RNA-Seq-derived gene model with additional peptide evidence as well as overlapping official gene models were analyzed using InterProScan 5. Examples where additional domains and functional signatures identified in the RNA-Seq-derived gene model were further analyzed and annotated using Clustal Omega and ToxoDB.