ABSTRACT:
Leguminous plants ‘fix’ atmospheric nitrogen through complex symbiotic relationships with rhizobial soil bacteria. These plants play a key role in agricultural sustainability because, unlike other major crops (e.g., corn, wheat and rice), they require no expensive and environmentally deleterious fertilizer. Much like the fundamental and unique insights obtained from the study of plant pathogens, research on symbiotic bacteria and their host plants is providing new mechanistic information on plant growth and development. In this resource we describe a large-scale, quantitative proteomic study, which includes key post-translational modifications, to establish the first global proteomic blueprint of a legume and its rhizobial endosymbiont. By quantifying over 23,000 proteins, 26,000 phosphorylation sites, and 600 acetylation sites, our studies reveal changes in protein expression and modification not evident from DNA- or RNA-based work. Our results illuminate two distinct stages in the symbiotic relationship and highlight elements of translational and post-translational controls not previously known.
METHODS:
Methods
Plant Materials and Growth
M. truncatula Jemalong A17 plants were grown and harvested under similar conditions to those used for the gene expression atlas presented by Benedito et al. Seeds were acid scarified, surface sterilized and vernalized for 3 days at 4°C. Germinated seedlings were grown in pots containing Turface in the greenhouse. Un-inoculated plants, fertilized daily with half-strength BD solution (Broughton and Dilworth, 1971) containing 2 mM KNO3 and 2 mM NH4NO3, were used for the collection of organs such as roots, stems, leaves, flowers, shoot buds, and seeds. All the above-mentioned organs, except for the flowers and seeds, were collected at 28 days after planting. For flowers and seeds, the initial vernalization was carried out for 2 weeks and the organs were harvested on the first day of flower opening and at maturity, respectively. Simultaneously a group of seeds vernalized for 3 days at 4°C and grown on Turface, inoculated with Sinorhizobium meliloti on the 1st and the 7th day after planting and fertilized with half-strength BD solution containing 0.5 mM KNO3, were used for the collection of 28 day-old nodules. For the collection of 10-and 14-day old nodules, plants were grown under aeroponic conditions and nodules were harvested 10 and 14 days post inoculation. Multiple plants were used for the organ collection and pooled to represent the biological replicates.
Protein Extraction
Organs were ground into a powder under liquid nitrogen using a mortar and pestle. Ice cold extraction buffer was added to each organ sample such that the volume of extraction buffer added (mL) was equal to five times the dry weight (g) of the ground plant organ. Sample mixtures were vortexed, subjected to probe sonication continuously for three minutes, and then filtered through Miracloth. Homogenized organ material was snap frozen in liquid nitrogen and stored at −80°C.
Protein was precipitated from organ extract using chloroform/methanol precipitation. One volume of chloroform was added to one volume of organ extract prior to vortexing. Three volumes of water were then added, followed by vortexing and subsequent centrifugation for 5 min (4696 x g, 4°C). The resulting top layer was removed and discarded with a serological pipet. Three volumes of methanol were then added to the solution, followed by vortexing and subsequent centrifugation for 5 min (4696 x g, 4°C). The resulting protein pellet was transferred to a 2mL eppendorf tube and washed 3x by vortexing with ice cold 80% acetone and centrifuging for 3 min (10,000 x g, 4°C). Following these washes, the protein pellet was dried on ice for approximately 1 hour and then immediately lysed.
Protein Lysis and Digestion
Protein pellets were re-suspended in approximately 1.25mL of lysis buffer (8M urea, 50mM Tris (pH 8), 30mM NaCl, 1mM CaCl2, 20mM sodium butyrate, 10mM nicotinamide, mini EDTA-free protease inhibitor (Roche Diagnostics, Indianapolis, IN), and phosSTOP phosphatase inhibitor (Roche Diagnostics, Indianapolis, IN)) and lysed on ice with a probe sonicator. Protein content was evaluated using a BCA assay (Thermo Fisher Scientific, San Jose, CA).
Proteins were reduced with 5mM dithiothreitol (incubation at 58°C for 40 minutes) and alkylated with 15mM iodoacetamide (incubation in the dark, at ambient temperature, for 40 minutes). Alkylation was quenched by adding an additional 5mM dithiothreitol (incubation at ambient temperature for 15 minutes). Proteins were enzymatically digested in a two-step process. First, proteinase LysC (Wako Chemicals, Richmond, VA) was added to each sample at a ratio of 1:200 (enzyme:protein) and the resulting mixtures were incubated at 37°C for 2.5 hours. Next, samples were diluted to a final concentration of 1.5 M urea (pH 8) with a solution of 50mM Tris and 5mM CaCl2. Sequencing-grade trypsin (Promega, Madison, WI) was added to each sample at a ratio of 1:50 (enzyme:protein) and the resulting mixtures were rocked at ambient temperature overnight. Digests were quenched by bringing the pH ~2 with trifluoroacetic acid and immediately desalted using C18 solid-phase extraction columns (SepPak, Waters, Milford, MA).
Protein Isobaric Labeling
Desalted material was labeled with TMT 10-plex isobaric tags (Thermo-Pierce, Rockford, IL). Only eight of the ten labels were used per experiment for the comparison of the eight different Medicago organs. Note that bud protein was only analyzed using deep proteome sequencing due to sample limitations. Prior to quenching the TMT reactions, ~5μg of material from each TMT channel was combined into a test mix and analyzed by LC-MS/MS to evaluate labeling efficiency and obtain optimal ratios for sample recombination. Following quenching, tagged peptides were combined in equal amounts by mass (~750μg per channel) and desalted. All experiments had ≥ 99% labeling efficiency, calculated by the number labeled peptides divided by the total number of peptide identifications.
Peptide Fractionation
TMT-labeled peptides were fractionated by strong cation exchange (SCX) using a polysulfoethylaspartamide column (9.4×200mm; PolyLC) on a Surveyor LC quaternary pump (Thermo Scientific). Buffer compositions were as follows: buffer A [5mM KH2PO4, 30% acetonitrile (pH 2.65)], buffer B [5mM KH2PO4, 350mM KCl, 30% acetonitrile (pH 2.65)], buffer C [50mM KH2PO4, 500mM KCl (pH 7.5)]. Each TMT mixture was re-suspended in buffer A, injected onto the column, and subjected to the following gradient for separation: 100% buffer A from 0-2 min, 0-15% buffer from 2-5 min, and 15-100% buffer B from 5-35 min. Buffer B was held at 100% for 10 minutes and then the column was washed extensively with buffer C and water prior to recalibration. Flow rate was held at 3.0 mL/min throughout the separation. Twelve fractions were collected over the first 50 minute elution period and were immediately frozen, lyophilized, and desalted. A small portion of each, 5%, was extracted and used for protein analysis. The remaining material was retained for phospho and acetyl lysine enrichment.
Unlabeled peptides were fractionated by high pH reverse-phase using a column packed with non-polar material (Gemini 5μm C18 110 Å LC Column 250 x 4.6 mm, Phenomenex, Torrance, CA) on a Surveyor LC quaternary pump (Thermo Scientific). Buffer compositions were as follows: buffer A [ (pH 10.0)] and buffer B [ (pH 10.0)]. Peptides from each organ were separately re-suspended in buffer A, injected onto the column, and subjected to the following gradient for separation: Flow rate was held at 0.8 mL/min for the first 40 minutes of fractionation and 1.0 mL/min for the final 20 minutes. Forty fractions were collected between 6 and 46 minutes of the elution period, then re-combined into ten fractions (final fraction 1: RP fractions 1, 11, 21, and 31, final fraction 2: RP fractions 2, 12, 22, and 32, … , final fraction 10: RP fractions 10, 20, 30, and 40). Re-combined fractions were immediately frozen, lyophilized, and stored in at −80°C until analyzed for deep proteome analysis.
Phosphopeptide Enrichment
Phosphopeptides were enriched using immobilized metal affinity chromatography (IMAC) with magnetic beads (Qiagen, Valencia, CA). Following equilibration with water, the magnetic beads were incubated with 40mM EDTA (pH 8.0) for 1 hour, with shaking. Next, the beads were washed four times with water and incubated with 30mM FeCl3 for 1 hour, with shaking. Beads were then washed four times with 80% acetonitrile/0.15% TFA. Each of the 12 fractions were re-suspended in 80% acetonitrile/0.15% TFA and incubated with the magnetic beads for 45 minutes, with shaking. Following this incubation, all unbound peptides were collected for subsequent acetyl lysine enrichment. Bound peptides were washed three times with 80% acetonitrile/0.15% TFA and eluted with 50% acetonitrile, 0.7% NH4OH. Eluted peptides were immediately acidified with 4% FA, frozen, and lyophilized. Each phospho peptide fraction was re-suspended in 20μL 0.2% FA for LC-MS/MS analysis.
Acetyl Lysine Enrichment
Peptides unbound by IMAC enrichment were pooled into 6 fractions. Each fraction was dissolved in 50mM HEPES (pH 7.5)/100mM KCl buffer, combined with approximately 50μL pan-acetyl lysine antibody-agarose conjugate (Immunechem), and rotated overnight at 4°C. Samples were rinsed eight times with 50mM HEPES (pH 7.5)/100mM KCl buffer prior to elution with 0.1% TFA. Eluted peptides were then desalted, frozen, and lyophilized. Each acetyl lysine fraction was re-suspended in 20μL 0.2% FA for LC-MS/MS analysis.
LC-MS/MS analysis
All experiments were performed using a NanoAcquity UPLC system (Waters, Milford, MA) coupled to an Orbitrap Fusion (Q-OT-qIT) mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, San Jose, CA). Reverse-phase columns were made in-house by packing a fused silica capillary (75μm i.d., 360 μm o.d, with a laser-pulled electrospray tip) with 1.7μm diameter, 130 Å pore size Bridged Ethylene Hybrid C18 particles (Waters) to a final length of 30cm. The column was heated to 60°C for all experiments. Samples were loaded onto the column for 12 minutes in 95:5 buffer A [water, 0.2% formic acid, and 5% DMSO]:buffer B [acetonitrile, 0.2% formic acid, and 5% DMSO] at a flow-rate of 0.30μL/min. Peptides were eluted using the following gradient: an increase to 7% B over 1 min, followed by a 42 min linear gradient from 7% to 18% B, followed by a 28 min linear gradient from 18% to 27% B, followed by a final 1 min ramp to 75% B which was held for 3 minutes. The column was equilibrated with 5% buffer B for an additional 25 min. Precursor peptide cations were generated from the eluent through the utilization of a nanoESI source. Phospho-enriched fractions were analyzed in duplicate.
Mass spectrometry instrument methods for TMT-labeled sample analysis consisted of MS1 survey scans (5e5 target value; 60,000 resolution; 350Th – 1400Th) that were used to guide subsequent data-dependent MS/MS scans analyzed in the orbitrap (5s cycle time, 1.0Th isolation window, HCD fragmentation; normalized collision energy of 37; 5e4 target value, 60,000 resolution). Dynamic exclusion duration was set to 30s, with a maximum exclusion list of 500 and an exclusion width of ±10ppm the selected average mass. Maximum injection times were set to 100ms for all MS1 scans, 100ms for MS/MS scans in whole protein analyses, and 250ms for MS/MS scans in phospho and acetyl enrichment analyses.
Mass spectrometry instrument methods for unlabeled sample analysis consisted of MS1 survey scans (5e5 target value; 60,000 resolution; 350Th – 1500Th) that were used to guide subsequent data-dependent MS/MS scans analyzed in the ion trap (1.0Th isolation window, HCD fragmentation; normalized collision energy of 30; 1e4 target value, IT rapid scan). Dynamic exclusion duration was set to 30s, with a maximum exclusion list of 500 and an exclusion width of ±10ppm the selected average mass. Maximum injection times were set to 100ms for all MS1 scans and 35ms for MS/MS scans.
Data Analysis
LFQ and TMT datasets were processed separately using the MaxQuant software (version 1.5.1.0). Searches were performed against a non-redundant target-decoy consensus database composed of four well-known M. truncatula protein sequence databases (UniProt - 2014.12.18, Ensembl - 2014.12.18, RefSeq - 2014.12.18, and the J. Craig Venter Institute - 2013.07.31), de novo gene models and a rhizobial protein database (S. meliloti, UniProt - 2015.01.30). The gene models were predicted with Augustus based on the Mt4.0 genome assembly (GCA_000219495.2, Ensembl Plants) and A. thaliana training parameters. Searches were conducted using the default precursor mass tolerances set by Andromeda (20 ppm first search, 4.5 ppm main search). LFQ data and TMT data were searched using a product mass tolerance of 0.35 Da and 0.015 Da, respectively. A maximum of 2 missed tryptic cleavages were allowed. The fixed modifications specified were carbamidomethylation of cysteine residues, TMT 10-plex on peptide N-termini, and TMT 10-plex on lysine residues. The variable modifications specified were oxidation of methionine and TMT 10-plex on tyrosine residues. Additional variable modifications were specified for phospho-peptide analyses (phosphorylation of threonine, serine, and tyrosine residues) and acetyl-peptide analyses (acetylation of lysine residues). Note that the acetylation modification mass shift was set to −187.1523 Da to account for the difference between an acetyl group and a TMT 10-plex tag, which enables the use of TMT 10-plex as a fixed modification on lysine residues, even for acetylated peptides. For all experiments, peptides and their corresponding proteins groups were both filtered to a 1% FDR.
Label-free quantification was performed within MaxQuant using MaxLFQ. Missing values were imputed using the Perseus tool available with MaxQuant by replacing missing values from a normal distribution to simulate low abundance values in a typical MS experiment. TMT quantification was performed within MaxQuant. Following MaxQuant analysis, noise-band capping and protein normalization was performed at the peptide level using in-house software that employs strategies described previously. To consolidate the TMT experimental data for the implementation of statistical analyses, quantitative data from each experiment was log2 transformed and mean-normalized across all organs for each given protein or PTM isoform. Each column was also mean-normalized prior to statistical analyses to center the distribution of quantitative values obtained for each organ within each replicate on zero.
PTM localization was performed within the MaxQuant software suite. Only those PTMs that could be localized to a specific amino acid residue with over 75% confidence were included in our analysis. PTM peptides were consolidated into PTM-isoforms as is performed in the COMPASS software suite.
Bioinformatics
The circular proteome map (CPM) was constructed using Circos. For the CPM, organ LFQ values (Lt) were normalized for each protein (l) as follows:  
To assign organs specificity to modified and unmodified proteins, we used Shannon entropy as previously described. In brief, a relative expression value for each protein was calculated, as follows:  
And a entropy index score (s) was calculated as  
A low score indicates organ specificity. In the case of modified proteins, we calculated scores for all isoforms for a protein and selected the isoform with the lowest score. For illustration purposes we inverted the scale, as follows:  
All statistical analyses were performed using R. Assessment of organ similarity using the LFQ data (Fig. 3) was generated by performing hierarchical clustering (Euclidean distance) on the Pearson correlation values calculated for each organ pair using the rcorr and corrplot package. ANOVA analyses were performed using only those proteins and PTM isoforms quantified across two or three replicates. For each dataset, the p-values resulting from ANOVA were corrected for multiple hypotheses; a cut-off of q < 0.01 was used to determine significance. Hierarchical clustering (Euclidean distance) was performed in R using only those proteins or PTM isoforms that were found to contain significant variance, as determined by ANOVA. Post hoc testing using the Tukey Honest Significant Differences (HSD) method was performed to evaluate organ-specificity for each protein/PTM isoform found to contain significant variance; if a given organ was found to be significantly up-regulated (p < 0.01) compared to every other organ, then that protein/PTM-isoform was considered to be specific to that given organ. Heatmaps were produced using the pheatmap package. Protein clusters were generated based on the protein dendrogram generated during the hierarchical clustering. The number of clusters produced following hierarchical clustering was user-defined and was selected based on observable heatmap trends, cluster membership, and GO enrichment (each of these factors was evaluated following the generation of 6, 8, 10, 12, 15, and 20 clusters for each dataset; the cluster count that produced the most intuitive grouping was selected). GO enrichment was performed using the Fisher’s exact test. The comparison of protein/PTM isoform expression between the nodules and all other organs (Fig. 5) was performed in R using the Student’s T-test. Phospho-serine and acetyl-lysine motif analysis was performed using all nodule-specific (Student’s t-test, q < 0.01 and fold-change > 2) phospho- and acetyl-isoforms, respectively. Motif analysis was performed using v1.2 of motif-x. Sequences were manually aligned and all M.truncatula proteins identified in our study were used as background. A width of 13 residues, minimum number of 15 occurrences, and a significance of 0.001 were specified prior to running motif-x. To identify NCR specific expression stages, we combined hierarchical (hard) clustering and fuzzy c-means (soft) clustering (Mfuzz package in R). The global ordering of the hierarchical clustering was refined with the fuzzy clusters by reordering according to the three stages.
Network analysis
To infer the regulatory network for M. truncatula, we used an expression-based network inference algorithm, Modular regulatory network learning with per gene information (MERLIN) algorithm within a stability selection framework. MERLIN models a regulatory network as a statistical dependency network representing regulatory relationships among regulators (such as transcription factors, signaling proteins, post-translational modifying enzymes) and target genes as a set of statistical dependencies. For each gene, MERLIN learns a separate regulatory program with the constraint that genes with similar expression profile should have similar (but not necessarily identical regulatory programs). MERLIN takes as input candidate regulators and genome-wide expression levels and uses an iterative algorithm to learn the regulators for individual genes, while imposing a module constraint. Briefly, in each iteration, MERLIN uses a greedy approach to update the regulatory program of each gene based on the expression of the regulators and module assignment of their targets, and then updates the module assignment using co-expression and co-regulation of the genes. Stability selection is a subsampling approach for estimating confidence on inferred network connections. MERLIN was applied on expression data downloaded from the Medicago truncatula Gene Expression Atlas (MtGEA) and created the expression data matrix. The data matrix has 254 samples from 33 experiments.
We quantile normalized the expression data and mapped the probeset IDs to Mt4.0 locus IDs. Briefly, we used BWA to align the probe sequences to the Mt4.0 reference transcriptome allowing no more than 1 mismatch in alignment. We calculated the specificity of each probeset/gene mapping based on the number of individual probes mapping to the target locus vs off-target. We considered only those probeset/gene mappings such that there were at least 5 probes specific to the assigned gene and that at least 80% of the probes in the probeset mapped uniquely to this gene. . We removed genes that did not vary significantly across samples. Specifically, we computed the mean for each gene, zero-mean transformed its expression level and included the gene only if its value varied at least +−1 from the mean in at least 5 samples. Our input included 15,643 genes and 2,821 candidate regulators defined based on literature as well as sequence annotations to identify new kinases. These regulators included transcription factors, kinases, as well additional regulators associated with post-translational modifications and genes involved in hormone metabolism. To assess confidence in the inferred network connections we used stability selection. Briefly, we created 40 sub-sets of the data set by randomly selecting 50% columns from the complete data set, and infer a MERLIN network for each sub-set. We estimate the confidence of each edge by calculating the percentage of times out of 40 we observed the edge in the inferred networks. The final inferred network was selected to be that which had an edge confidence of at least 60%. The network connected 1248 regulators to 8,194 target genes. The inference process is time consuming and it takes ~72 hours to infer each of these networks. To speed up this process we used HTCondor high-throughput computing cluster in UW-Madison to run the network inference runs in parallel.
Website
All relevant information from the search results and data analysis were imported into a MySQL database. The results were supplemented by ordered gene locus identifiers and cross references to public databases (Ensembl, JCVI, UniProt, RefSeq). The interface to access the database was built with the Bootstrap front-end framework and data visualization implemented with the D3.js JavaScript library.