ABSTRACT:
About one-third of oestrogen receptor alpha-positive breast cancer patients treated with tamoxifen relapse. Here we identify the nuclear receptor retinoic acid receptor alpha as a marker of tamoxifen resistance. Using quantitative mass spectrometry-based proteomics, we show that retinoic acid receptor alpha protein networks and levels differ in a tamoxifen-sensitive (MCF7) and a tamoxifen-resistant (LCC2) cell line. High intratumoural retinoic acid receptor alpha protein levels also correlate with reduced relapse-free survival in oestrogen receptor alpha-positive breast cancer patients treated with adjuvant tamoxifen solely. A similar retinoic acid receptor alpha expression pattern is seen in a comparable independent patient cohort. An oestrogen receptor alpha and retinoic acid receptor alpha ligand screening reveals that tamoxifen-resistant LCC2 cells have increased sensitivity to retinoic acid receptor alpha ligands and are less sensitive to oestrogen receptor alpha ligands compared with MCF7 cells. Our data indicate that retinoic acid receptor alpha may be a novel therapeutic target and a predictive factor for oestrogen receptor alpha-positive breast cancer patients treated with adjuvant tamoxifen.
 Many patients with breast cancer develop resistance to the drug tamoxifen and relapse. Here Johansson et al. identify the nuclear receptor retinoic acid receptor alpha (RARA) as a marker of tamoxifen resistance and show that RARA expression correlates negatively with relapse-free survival of patients.
METHODS:
Methods
Proteomics of DNA-binding and cytosol subcellular fractions
For proteomics experiments, MCF7 and LCC2 cells were treated with 1 μM 4-OHT for 3 days and fractionated into a cytosolic and DNA-binding fraction (Q proteome nuclear kit; Qiagen). Three biological replicates of each sample were labelled with iTRAQ 4plex according to the manufacturer’s protocol (Applied Biosystems, Framingham, MA, USA) and separated by IPG-IEF on a narrow range pH 3.5–4.5 strip (GE Healthcare) as described previously. Extracted fractions from the IPG-IEF were separated using an Ultimate 3000 LC system (Dionex/LC Packings, Sunnyvale, CA, USA) coupled to a Probot MALDI spotting device and then analysed on an 4800 MALDI-TOF/TOF instrument (Applied Biosystems). Fractions were also analysed using an Agilent 1200 nano-LC system coupled to an Agilent 6530 Q-TOF via a Chip-Cube.
Protein pilot and spectrum mill were used to match the spectra. Protein identification were limited to a FDR of <1%. Protein quantification and peptide quality control (PQPQ) was used for quantification of replicates.
Ligands and siRNA
Ligands, fulvestrant (ICI 182780), AM580, BMS 195 614, BMS 493 (BMS 204 493) and fenretinide were from Tocris Biosciences. E2 and 4-OHT were purchased from Sigma. Ligands were dissolved in dimethylsulphoxide and three-fold dilution series over 11 points were done by Echo 550 liquid handler. Cells were treated with ligands for 3 days and final dimethylsulphoxide concentration was <0.1% for all concentrations. Replicates for the same ligand concentration were on different Costar black clear bottom 96-well plates. siRNA on-targetplus smartpool targeting RARA (L-003437-00), ESR1 (L-003401-00), p53 (L-003329-00) and non-target (D-001810-01) were from Dharmacon and reverse transfected using RNAiMax (Invitrogen). For siRNA, treatments were done for 4 days using 10 nM siRNA.
Proliferation
Cells were stained using GE Healthcare Cell Proliferation Fluorescence kit and Hoechst 33342 (Sigma). Images were collected using an IN Cell Analyzer 2000 acquiring four images per well with a Nikon × 10/0.45 objective. Fluorescence was monitored using excitation and emission filters, respectively, of: (1) 350/50 and 455/50 nm for Hoechst 33342 and (2) 645/30 and 705/72 nm for Cy5, Quad 2 polychroic and hardware laser autofocus. Images were analysed with IN Cell Analyzer Workstation 3.7 software using the Multi Target Analysis module. Segmentation, nuclei (Hoechst) was defined using top-hat and Colditz (Cy5) using pseudo from nuclei, minimum area 50 μm2. The proportion of proliferating cells, positive for both Hoechst 33342 and Cy5 signal, was determined using a decision tree filter.
Patient cohorts
The study design was done according to the REMARK criteria for tumour marker studies and approved by the research ethical boards of Linköping University and the Karolinska Institutet, Stockholm, Sweden. Two independent patient cohorts were used for validation studies. Both included patients with ER and/or PR positive tumours of primary early-BC stage I–III having received tamoxifen as the sole systemic adjuvant therapy and have previously been subjects for extensive research, leaving fewer patients for analyses of RARA. Patient cohort I originally consisted of 449 patients diagnosed from 1991 to 1996 in the south east health-care region of Sweden. This patient population and sample preparation have previously been described in detail and used for determination of intratumoural VEGF content and other markers, not yet published, which reduced the available material to 72 patients tumour homogenates. Determination of RARA levels in this cohort was done by western blot (n=8) and use of a commercial ELISA (USCN cat no. E90976Hu) (n=72). The pilot verification included tumour homogenates from four patients who relapsed within 2 years of tamoxifen treatment (denoted relapse) and four patients with a disease-free follow-up time of more than 7 years to circumventing a possible ‘hangover’ effect of tamoxifen (denoted control). Patients were matched into four pairs defined by age, tumour size and node status (Supplementary Table S1).
Patients in cohort II were diagnosed from 1993 to 1996 at two institutions in Stockholm, Sweden. The original cohort includes tumour homogenates from 404 patients and which has been described in detail elsewhere where data on histological grade and HER2 also are found. The TMA used in this study consisted of 45 available paraffin-embedded tumours. Basal clinical and BC-marker features for the two cohorts are shown in Tables 1 and 2.
Construction of TMAs
A TMA was constructed from formalin-fixed primary tumours (n=95). Before TMA construction, all tumours were evaluated by an experienced pathologist by staining with hematoxylin. Two cores were taken from donor block areas morphologically representative of the tumour and used for the construction of the recipient TMA blocks. This was done using a Beecher Manual Arrayer 1 (Beecher Instruments, Silver Spring, MD, USA) with a punch diameter of 1 mm. From the TMA, 4-μM paraffin sections were sliced and put on glass slides and subsequently dewaxed and rehydrated. The slides were thereafter boiled in citrate buffer (pH 6.0, 12 min at 800 W and 20 min at 250 W), allowed to cool and rinsed with PBS. After blocking in 1% BSA solution, the slides were incubated with RARA (sc-551) as the primary antibody. The staining of RARA was visualized by applying a biotinylated secondary antibody followed by ABC and diaminobenzidine as a chromogene (Vector Laboratories) and counterstained with hematoxylin and eosin. The staining of RARA was evaluated by two trained pathologists in a blinded fashion (A.K. and G.M.).
Survival analyses
For correlation and survival analyses, patients were operated in two groups; low versus high RARA separated by median value. Pearson’s χ2-test was used to analyse possible associations between RARA levels and standard BC parameters including S-phase fraction as well as previously determined VEGF. Factors investigated (RARA, tumour size, lymph-node status, S-phase fraction, VEGF and age) were dichotomized. Data were available on HER2 and histological grade in patient cohort II. HER2 was operated as positive versus negative, and histological grade as grade I and II versus grade III. Survival was estimated using the Kaplan–Meier method, and the comparison between study groups was performed with the log-rank test. The end-point RFS was calculated as time from diagnosis to the first documented recurrence. All tests were two-sided, and P-values <0.05 were considered significant. All calculations were made with SPSS 16.0.
Protein expression analysis by western blot
After 3 days of treatment, cells were collected and lysed using the radioprecipitation assay buffer (50 mM Tris, pH 7.4, 150 mM NaCl, 0.5% Igepal, 5 mM EDTA and 0.1% SDS) supplemented with Mini protease inhibitor cocktail. Cell lysates and patient tumour homogenates were quantified using the DC Protein Assay Kit (Bio-Rad). A total of 50 μg of cell lysate and 30 μg of tumour homogenate per sample were run on SDS-PAGE gels (NuPage Bis Tris 10%; Invitrogen), blotted and subsequently incubated overnight with ESR1 (Sc-8002, 1:500), RARA (sc-551, 1:500), actin (Sc-1616-R, 1:2,000) from Santa Cruz Biotechnology and GAPDH from Trevigen (2275-PC-100, 1:2,000). After incubation with anti-mouse or anti-rabbit IgG-horseradish peroxidase conjugate (1:5,000) (GE Healthcare), bands were detected using ECL Western Blotting Detection Reagents (Amersham).
Quantitative PCR analysis
Protein, mRNA and DNA were extracted using the AllPrep DNA/RNA/Protein Mini Kit (Qiagen, Hilden, Germany), and mRNA concentration was measured using NanoDrop (Thermo Fisher Scientific). RNA of 500 ng was retrotranscribed using High Capacity RNA to cDNA kit (Invitrogen) according to the manufacturer’s instructions. cDNA of 10 ng was used for each quantitative PCR reaction, and the reactions were performed in a 96-well plate using TaqMan Gene Expression Assay (Invitrogen). The following assays were used: RARA (Hs00940446_m1) and ESR1 (Hs00174860_m1); for normalization purposes, 18S (Hs99999901_s1) was used.
Changes in mRNA levels in the cell lines were calculated with the ΔΔCt method, based on Ct cycle values for the target gene of interest normalized to 18S and then expressed as fold change to the untreated samples.
Relative mRNA levels in the tumours were determined using the ΔCt method, only based on Ct cycle values for the target gene of interest normalized to 18S.
Assessment of secreted VEGF
Conditioned media was collected before cell collection and stored at −20 °C after protein determination. The protein levels of VEGF were measured on conditioned media by a quantitative ELISA kit for human VEGF-A (Quantikine; R&D Systems, Minneapolis, MN, USA) according to the manufacturer’s protocol.
Proteomics of 4-OHT- and fulvestrant-treated cells
MCF7 and LCC2 cells were treated with 10 nM 4-OHT or fulvestrant for 3 days and then lysed in 4% SDS, 25 mM HEPES and 1 mM dithiothreitol. Cell lysates were heated to 95 °C for 5 min followed by sonication for 1 min and centrifugation at 14,000 g for 15 min. The supernatant was subjected to spin filter sample preparation. The tryptic peptides were iTRAQ-labelled according to the manufacturer’s protocol (Applied Biosystems) and cleaned by a strata-X-C-cartridge (Phenomenex) before separation by IPG-IEF on a pH 3.7–4.9 strip as described above. Before analysis of IPG-IEF fractions on the Thermo Scientific LTQ Orbitrap Velos, peptides were separated using an Agilent 1200 nano-LC system. Samples were trapped on Zorbax 300SB-C18, 5 μm, 5 × 0.3 mm, and separated on a NTCC-360/100-5-153 column (Nikkyo Technos., Ltd) using a gradient of A (3% ACN, 0.1% FA) and B (95% ACN, 0.1% FA), ranging from 3 to 40% B in 90 min with a flow of 0.4 μl min−1. The LTQ Orbitrap Velos was operated in a data-dependent mode, selecting five precursors for sequential fragmentation by collision-induced dissociation (CID) and higher-energy collisional dissociation (HCD), analysed by the linear iontrap and orbitrap, respectively. Proteome discoverer 1.3 with sequest-percolator was used for protein identification. Spectra were matched to ensembl 68, limited to human protein sequences, and results were filtered to 1% FDR. For detailed methods, see Supplementary Information.