ABSTRACT:
Though the rhesus monkey is one of the most valuable non-human primate animal models for various human diseases because of its manageable size and genetic and proteomic similarities with humans, proteomic research using rhesus monkeys still remains challenging due to the lack of a complete protein sequence database and effective strategy. To investigate the most effective and high-throughput proteomic strategy, comparative data analysis was performed employing various protein databases and search engines. The UniProt databases of monkey, human, bovine, rat and mouse were used for the comparative analysis and also a universal database with all protein sequences from all available species was tested. At the same time, de novo sequencing was compared to the SEQUEST search algorithm to identify an optimal work flow for monkey proteomics. Employing the most effective strategy, proteomic profiling of monkey organs identified 3,481 proteins at 0.5% FDR from 9 male and 10 female tissues in an automated, high-throughput manner. Data are available via ProteomeXchange with identifier PXD001972. Based on the success of this alternative interpretation of MS data, the list of proteins identified from 12 organs of male and female subjects will benefit future rhesus monkey proteome research.
METHODS:
Materials and Methods
Chemicals and reagents
All solvents for mass spectrometry analysis, 0.1% formic acid in water and 0.1% formic acid in ACN were of LC-MS grade purchased from EMD (Gibbstown, NJ, USA). Sequencing grade modified trypsin was from Promega (Madison, WI, USA) and Gelcode Blue stain reagent was from Pierce (Rockford, IL, USA). Complete protease inhibitor cocktail tablet was obtained from Roche (Mannheim, Germany). Ammonium bicarbonate, ammonium acetate, DTT, iodoacetamide, Tris-HCl, bromophenol blue, beta-mercaptoethanol, Tween 20, formic acid and SDS were obtained from Sigma-Aldrich (St. Louis, MO, USA). Glycerol was from Life Technologies (Gaithersburg, MD, USA). All buffers and solutions were prepared using deionized water by Milli-Q, Millipore (Bedford, MA, USA). Primary antibodies against human vimentin and heat shock protein-70 (HSP-70) were purchased from BD Biosciences (Franklin Lakes, NJ, USA); those against beta-actin and glyceraldehyde 3-phosphate dehydrogenase (GAPDH) were purchased from Santa Cruz (Santa Cruz, CA, USA). Primary antibody against human beta-catenin was from Cell Signaling (Danvers, MA, USA). Unless stated otherwise, all other chemicals were extra-pure grade or cell culture tested.
Tissue collection from animal subjects
Tissues from twelve organs of rhesus monkeys were provided from Dr. Kuroda of Tulane University. Experimental procedures described for tissue collection were approved by the Tulane Institutional Animal Care and Use Committee (Protocol Number: P0162) and performed according to the ARRIVE guidelines (S1 Table). In detail, all animals were housed either outdoors or indoors prior to euthanasia at the Tulane National Primate Research Center (TNPRC), an Association for the Assessment and Accreditation of Laboratory Animal Care, International (AAALAC)-accredited facility, in accordance with standard husbandry practices following the Guide for the Care and Use of Laboratory Animals (NIH). Indoor animals were kept in temperature-controlled facilities with a 12:12 light:dark cycle. Animals were fed LabDiet Fiber-Plus Monkey Diet (LabDiet; St. Louis, MO). Additional feeding enrichment and forage items were given as part of a comprehensive environmental enrichment program that also uses social housing to promote species-typical behavior.
Animals were humanely euthanized by the veterinary staff at the TNPRC in accordance with endpoint policies. Euthanasia was conducted by anesthesia with ketamine HCl (10 mg/kg) followed by an overdose with sodium pentobarbital. This method is consistent with the recommendation of the Panel on Euthanasia of the American Veterinary Medical Association. Tissues were collected from subjects involved in other studies. Animals were euthanized as part of those studies and/or for humane reasons, such as in the case of injury or behavioral issues.
Nine tissues, namely, frontal cortex, cerebellum, right ventricle, mesenteric lymph node, proximal bile duct, liver, pancreas, prostate (apex) and penis were collected from a 6.54 year’s old male subject, and ten tissues, namely, frontal cortex, cerebellum, right ventricle, mesenteric lymph node, proximal bile duct, liver, pancreas, breast, ovary and clitoris were collected from a 10.55 year’s old female subject. Tissues were snap frozen in liquid nitrogen prior to be stored at −80°C.
Preparation of Proteomic Samples
50 mg of frozen tissues were transferred into clean tubes with ice-cold PBS, then washed briefly by flicking tubes with one additional change of PBS. The tissues were homogenized mechanically in 1 mL of RIPA buffer containing 50 mM Tris-HCl, 150 mM NaCl, 1% NP-40, 0.5% sodium deoxycholate and 0.1% SDS (pH 8.0) with a protease inhibitor cocktail using a TH115 homogenizer (Omni International, Kennesaw, GA, USA). Crude lysates were centrifuged at 12,000 x g at 4°C for 15 min after incubation on an ice bath for 30 min. Then supernatants were transferred into clean tubes and put into -80°C for long-term storage. The protein quantitation was carried out using a BCA protein assay kit purchased from Thermo Pierce (Rockford, IL, USA).
Lysates were reduced and denatured by heating with 6X sample buffer containing 300 mM Tris-HCl, 0.01% bromophenol blue (w/v), 15% glycerol (v/v), 6% SDS (w/v) and 1% beta-mercaptoethanol (v/v). 30 μg of total proteins were separated on a 10% Bis-Tris SDS-PAGE gel (Invitrogen, Carlsbad, CA, USA). Gels were stained with GelCode blue stain reagent after fixation using 50% methanol (v/v) with 7% acetic acid (v/v) for 5 min. After destaining with water, each gel lane was excised into twenty slices, which were then chopped into 1-mm3 pieces. The gel pieces were de-stained with 50% ACN (v/v) and 25 mM ammonium bicarbonate at room temperature for 30 min three times. Once Coomassie stain was removed, gel pieces were dehydrated using 100% ACN at room temperature for 30 min, then dried in a Centrivap (Labconco, Kansas City, MO, USA). The gel pieces were re-hydrated and incubated at 37°C overnight in 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate containing 12.5 ng/mL of trypsin. Peptides from the gel pieces were extracted by the addition of 50% ACN (v/v) with 5% formic acid (v/v) 3 times. Extract was vacuum-dried in the Centrivap and residues were resuspended in 20 μL of 5% ACN (v/v) with 3% formic acid (v/v) for LC-MS/MS analysis.
Liquid chromatography and tandem mass spectrometry
The LC-MS/MS system used for comprehensive tissue proteomics consisted of an LTQ-XL mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific, Rockford, IL, USA) employing a nanoscale electrospray ionization source (PicoView, New Objective, Woburn, MA, USA) in combination with ACQUITY UPLC system (Waters, Milford, MA, USA). An in-house made trap column (0.15 x 30 mm) and analytical column with needle tip (0.1 mm x 100 mm) were employed for peptide separation. Magic C18 (100 Å, 5 μm, New Objective, Woburn, MA, USA) was used for the stationary phase, which was packed into a fused silica capillary using high pressure nitrogen gas. A customized double-split system was used to achieve nanoliter per minute flow rates. Good chromatographic separation was observed with a 65 minute linear gradient consisting of mobile phases solvent A (0.1% formic acid in water) and solvent B (0.1% formic acid in ACN) where the gradient was 0min, 5%B ➔ 65min, 40%B). MS spectra were acquired by data dependent scans consisting of MS/MS scans of the eight most intense ions from the full MS scan with dynamic exclusion of 60 seconds. The mass spectrometry proteomics data have been deposited to the ProteomeXchange Consortium via the PRIDE partner repository with the dataset identifier PXD001972.
Also, a high-resolution LC-MS/MS (LTQ/Orbitrap-XL mass spectrometer, Thermo Scientific, Rockford, IL, USA) equipped with Nanoacquity UPLC system (Waters, Milford, MA, USA) was used for the experiments which included de novo sequencing. Peptides were separated on a reversed phase analytical column (Nanoacquity BEH C18, 1.7μm, 150mm, Waters, Milford, MA, USA) combined with trap column (Nanoacquity, Waters, Milford, MA, USA). Good chromatographic separation was observed with a 75 min linear gradient consisting of mobile phases solvent A (0.1% formic acid in water) and solvent B (0.1% formic acid in ACN) where the gradient was from 5% B at 0 min to 40% B at 65 min. MS spectra were acquired by data dependent scans consisting of MS/MS scans of the eight most intense ions from the full MS scan with dynamic exclusion of 30 seconds.
Proteomics data analysis
Spectra were searched using the SEQUEST search algorithm within Proteome Discoverer v1.4 (Thermo Scientific, Rockford, IL, USA) using the annotated UniProt FASTA database of human (20,162 entries), mouse (17,123 entries), rat (8,016 entries) and bovine (6,859 entries). In addition, UniProt database of total species (547,357 entries with annotation for the whole species) and UniProt database of canonical and isoform sequences (TrEMBL) for Macaca mulatta (71,058 entries) were used for comparison. Also, the annotated Macaca mulatta database (358 entries) was employed for the generation of a peptide list for further data analysis. Search parameters for LTQ-XL were as follows: parent mass tolerance of 2.0 Da, fragment mass tolerance of 1.0 Da (monoisotopic), variable modification on methionine of 16 Da (oxidation) and maximum missed cleavage of 2 sites using the digestion enzyme trypsin. 0.5 Da of parent mass tolerance and 10 ppm of fragment mass tolerance were used for FT-MS. Search results were entered into Scaffold software (v4.0.1, Proteome Software, Portland, OR) for compilation, normalization, and comparison of spectral counts. Protein identifications were made at the 95% of peptide probability and 99% of protein probability of with at minimum one identified peptides. Shared and semi-tryptic peptides were excluded from spectral counts. Protein probability and redundancy were assigned by the Protein Prophet algorithm. Proteins that contained similar peptides and multiple isoforms, which could not be differentiated based on MS/MS spectra, were grouped into primarily assigned proteins. The intersection of datasets were acquired using a Microsoft Excel program with modified macro equations.
Alternatively, de novo sequencing was tested for data search and was performed using PEAKS Studio v.5.1 (Bioinformatics Solutions, Ontario, Canada) with the following parameters: FT-trap instrument, parent mass error tolerance of 10.0 ppm, fragment mass error tolerance of 0.5 Da (monoisotopic), trypsin enzyme, variable modification on methionine of 16 Da (oxidation) and maximum missed cleavage of 2 sites assuming the digestion enzyme trypsin.
For gene ontology analysis, compiled datasets from each tissue sample including protein name, accession number and spectral count were put into pathway analysis by uploading them into Ingenuity Pathway Analysis (IPA) v9.0 (Ingenuity Systems, Mountain View, CA, USA). Analysis settings included the reference set of the Ingenuity Knowledge Base (genes only). Ingenuity Pathway Analysis is an algorithm enabling network assembly and interrogation of the scientific literature that documents direct and indirect relationships between genes. Identified proteins were analyzed in order to obtain the most significant biological functions and physiological functions.
Western blot analysis
Proteomic datasets from computational data analysis were validated by western blot assay. In brief, 20 μg of protein with sample buffer was loaded onto a Bolt 4 ~ 12% Bis-Tris Plus (Invitrogen, Carlsbad, CA, USA) gel and separated at 165 V for 35 min. Then proteins were transferred from the gel to 0.45 μm nitrocellulose membrane (BioRad, Hercules, CA, USA) using the Xcell-II blot module (Invitrogen, Carlsbad, CA, USA) at 25 V for 2 hr. The membrane was blocked for one hour at room temperature with blocking buffer, 5% dried non-fat milk (BioRad, Hercules, CA. USA) dissolved in Tris-buffered saline containing 0.1% Tween-20 (TBST). Membranes were incubated with primary antibody at 1:1,000 ~ 1:5,000 dilutions in blocking buffer overnight at 4°C. Blots were washed with TBST for 15 min 3 times. Membranes were incubated in the appropriate secondary antibody conjugated to HRP for 1 hr at room temperature. Blots were washed with TBST 3 times for 15 min. Chemiluminescent detection was accomplished using Amersham ECL prime western blotting detection reagent (GE Healthcare, Fairfield, CT, USA) and the UVP Biospectrum 500 Imaging System (Upland, CA, USA).
Immunohistochemistry
Tissue sections were prepared from formalin-fixed, paraffin-embedded tissue blocks by deparaffinization with xylene and hydration using alcohol and deionized water. The rest of the procedure was performed using the Autostainer Plus. After blocking of endogenous peroxidase with 3% (v/v) hydrogen peroxide, tissue slides were incubated with primary antibody at the dilution of 1:100. Secondary antibody was followed by peroxidase-conjugated streptavidin for 10 min and 3’-diaminobenzidine for 5 min. Tissue slides were rinsed with water and counterstained with hematoxylin, dehydrated, cleared and mounted with resin matrix. Slides were visualized using an Olympus BX51 microscope equipped with an Olympus DP70 camera and DP controller imaging software (Olympus Corporation, Tokyo, Japan).