ABSTRACT:
Lung cancer is the most frequent cause of cancer-related death world-wide. Radiotherapy alone or in conjunction with chemotherapy is the standard treatment for locally advanced non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC). Currently there is no predictive marker with clinical utility to guide treatment decisions in NSCLC patients undergoing radiotherapy. Identification of such markers would allow treatment options to be considered for more effective therapy. To enable the identification of appropriate protein biomarkers, plasma samples were collected from patients with non-small cell lung cancer before and during radiotherapy for longitudinal comparison following a protocol that carries sufficient power for effective discovery proteomics. Plasma samples from patients pre- and during radiotherapy who had survived > 18 mo were compared to the same time points from patients who survived < 14 mo using an 8 channel isobaric tagging tandem mass spectrometry discovery proteomics platform. Over 650 proteins were detected and relatively quantified. Proteins which showed a change during radiotherapy were selected for validation using an orthogonal antibody-based approach. Two of these proteins were verified in a separate patient cohort: values of CRP and LRG1 combined gave a highly significant indication of extended survival post one week of radiotherapy treatment.
Highlights
We demonstrate that the plasma proteome of lung squamous cell carcinoma patients are changed during radiotherapy.
We demonstrate that using a combination LRG1 and CRP proteins patient survival can be predicted.
Research in Context
Lung cancer is the most frequent cause of cancer-related death world-wide. The main curative treatment is surgery but due to diagnosis at a late stage or complicating factors this is not an option for the majority of patients, and so radiotherapy is common. Radiotherapy is known to cause severe toxicity which can be life threatening but there is no markers which can be used to guide treatment. Therefore we have studied the changes in blood during radiotherapy, identifying two proteins which predict survival. These proteins may allow radiotherapy of lung cancer patients to be guided early during treatment.
METHODS:
Materials and Methods
Sample Collection
Blood was collected from donors in lithium heparin coated tubes and centrifuged within 30 min of collection at 2500 ×g for 15 min at 4 °C before aliquots of the plasma layer were stored at − 80 °C. Samples were collected at the following time points for each patient; before RT, during RT (days 2, 3, 8, then weekly) and on completion after RT (months 1, 3, 6) (Fig. 1). Blood samples were taken from 29 randomised patients with lung cancer enrolled in the RADAR study at the Christie Hospital, Manchester, UK following written informed consent with ethical approval from the Central Manchester Local Research Ethics Committee. This proteomic analysis was undertaken on two samples per patient collected prior to the start of radiotherapy and a third sample on day 8 of the treatment regimen.
Proteomic Workflow and Experimental Setup
The experiment and workflow was carried out as in Fig. 1. A 50 μl aliquot of each sample in the study was pooled and used as a pooled internal control sample, analysed in duplicate in each isobaric tagging for relative and absolute quantification (iTRAQ) experiment to test technical variation. Each iTRAQ experiment consisted of two internal control samples (channels 119 and 121) and six samples from two patients randomised into the remaining channels. The study used three iTRAQ experiments to analyse samples from six patients.
Protein Depletion, Digestion and Labelling
Abundant proteins were removed from plasma using an Agilent Mars14 chromatography column following the manufacturers' protocol (Agilent, Palo Alto, CA, USA). Depleted samples were concentrated and exchanged into 1 M triethyl ammonium bicarbonate (TEAB) using 4 ml spin concentrators with a 5 KDa molecular weight cutoff filter (Agilent Palo Alto, CA, USA) as per manufacturer's instructions. The protein concentration in buffer-exchanged samples was measured using Bio-Rad protein assay reagent (Bio-Rad, Hercules, CA, USA). 50 μg of each sample was reduced with the addition of 1/10th of the sample volume of 50 mM tris(2-carboxyethyl)phosphine for 1 h at 60 °C. Cysteine residues were then alkylated by the addition of 1/20th of the total sample volume of 200 mM methyl thiomethanesulfonate (in isopropanol) before incubation for 10 min at room temperature. Protein was digested by the addition of 5 μg of porcine trypsin (Promega, Madison, WI, USA), followed by overnight incubation at 37 °C. The digested protein samples were isobarically tagged with 8plex iTRAQ reagents according to the manufacturers' instructions (ABSCIEX, Framingham, MA, USA). After labelling the samples were dried at 60 °C in a DNA concentrator (GeneVac, Ipswich, UK) and then stored at − 20 °C.
High pH Reverse Phase Chromatography
Isobarically tagged samples were reconstituted in 100 μl of buffer A (99.5% water adjusted to pH 10.5 with ammonium hydroxide) and appropriate samples pooled prior to being loaded onto a 100 mm × 4.6 mm 3 μm C18 HPLC columns (Agilent Palo Alto, CA, USA). Peptides were eluted by the application of a linear 30 min gradient up to 50% buffer B (Acetonitrile, 0.1% (v/v) ammonium hydroxide) with 70 × 15 s fractions collected from 4 min. Fractions were dried in a DNA concentrator (GeneVac Ipswich, UK) at 60 °C and stored at − 20 °C.
Mass Spectrometry (MS/MS)
Samples were reconstituted in 30 μl of samples loading buffer (20 mM citric acid, 2% (v/v) acetonitrile and 0.1% (v/v) formic acid). 3 μl of each fraction was then loaded onto a nanoACQUITY UPLC Symmetry C18 Trap, 5 μm, 180 μm × 20 mm (Waters, Milford, MA, USA) at 15 μl/min of 3% (v/v) acetonitrile, 0.1% (v/v) formic acid for 5 min. Analytical separation of the peptides was performed using nanoACQUITY UPLC BEH C18 Column, 1.7 μm, 75 μm × 250 mm (Waters, Milford, MA, USA). Briefly, peptides were separated over a 91 min solvent gradient from 3% (v/v) acetonitrile, 0.1% (v/v) formic acid to 40% (v/v) acetonitrile, 0.1% (v/v) formic acid. MS was carried out by a TripleTOF 5600 (ABSciex, Framingham, MA, USA) set up to analyse the top 20 ions by MS/MS per MS scan. The MS scanned between 350 and 1250 m/z with an accumulation time of 250 ms. Ions were only selected for MS/MS if they were over 150 counts per a second and had a charge state of between 2 and 5, ions previously selected were excluded for 30 s. The MS/MS was carried out in high sensitivity mode with 100 ms accumulation time and a rolling collision energy based upon mass and charge with a spread of 20. The MS/MS scanned between 100 and 1600 m/z.
Protein Identification
All MS/MS data were submitted to ProteinPilot software version 4.5 (ABSCIEX, Framingham, MA, USA) for database searching and iTRAQ reporter ion quantification. Searches were performed against the Ensembl human core 63 data base (85285 entries, downloaded 2012) with the following settings; cysteine alkylation with methanethiosulfonate (MMTS), biological modifications allowed and trypsin as the digestion enzyme. The search was carried out with default settings and thus the cleavage specificity, number of missed cleavages and mass tolerances were preset. The false discovery rate (FDR) of protein identification was controlled using a target-decoy searching strategy where forward and reverse sequences from a database were in equal competition to be the highest ranking identification for each spectrum. The q-value approach was then applied to define a cut-off for peptide confidence so that the control criteria of FDR can be met. The maximum allowed FDR for protein identification was set to 5%. The iTRAQ data has been deposited to the ProteomeXchange Consortium via the PRIDE partner repository with the dataset identifier PXD001052 and uploaded to http://www.scalpl.org/hank/MatchPage;jsessionid=80bf3253ea31befd6e36c2ce957a?0 under RADAR. Guide to the use of this database can be found in Supplementary Document 1.
Identifying Proteins That Are Differentially Expressed
Based on two baseline samples and one post-treatment sample per patient we aimed to discover proteins that were differentially expressed in response to radiotherapy, and in particular, to discover those that allowed discrimination between patients with good and poor survival. Aspects of data variation were investigated in order to assign reliable statistical significance to the observed protein changes.
Technical variation inherent in each iTRAQ experiment was estimated from the technical replicates included in the experiments, using the method as described in the supplementary material. This method allowed estimation of technical variation following a Normal distribution for each individual protein.
There is no change in disease during the period from which baseline samples were taken.
Within-person variation didn't change in response to treatment, i.e., once the variation was estimated using the baseline data it can also be used in analysing the post-treatment data.
All proteins were assumed to follow a same Normal distribution. This assumption was adopted because two baseline samples didn't allow accurate estimation of within-person variation for each individual protein. The distribution of the baseline variation was illustrated in Supplementary Fig. 1 and the validity of the assumption is shown.
All proteins were assumed to follow a same Normal distribution. This assumption was adopted because two baseline samples didn't allow accurate estimation of within-person variation for each individual protein. The distribution of the baseline variation was illustrated in Supplementary Fig. 1 and the validity of the assumption is shown.
Within-person variation can be estimated by the changes between the two baseline samples. These changes were measured as log ratios and were considered to come from a combination of technical variation and within-person variation, therefore:where I1 is the expression level at the first baseline and I2 is the expression level at the second baseline. Three assumptions had to be adopted to make the estimation of within-person variation valid:
The methodology described above was adapted from previous publications.
Inter-person variation was estimated as following a unique Normal distribution for each individual protein. If it was intended to find proteins that were differentially expressed following treatment, i.e. equal treatment effect were expected for all patients, inter-person variation should be estimated using all available patients. Otherwise, if it was intended to find proteins that change differently in patients from different cohort, inter-person variation had to be estimated separately for each cohort of patients. Inter-person variation was estimated by deducting technical variation and within-person variation from the observed variation within the defined cohort of patients, as published.
With the technical variation, within-person variation and inter-person variation estimated for each protein, the statistical significance (p-values) of the observed changes on one protein can be readily defined. Proteins differentially expressed as a result of treatment were identified according to the p-values, and a q-value approach was applied for FDR control to ensure that only the most confident identifications were retained for further validation.
The acute phase response pathway diagrams were generated through the use of IPA (Ingenuity® Systems, www.ingenuity.com).
Verification of Potential Biomarkers
Levels of target proteins were measured using commercial ELISA kits, LRG1 (Demeditec, Germany), CRP (Invitrogen, Paisley, UK), LBP (Abnova, Taipei City, Taiwan) following manufacturer's instructions. IL6 was measured using the SearchLight Plus multiplex ELISA platform (Aushon BioSystems, Boston, US) and was run using the method previously described. The verification analysis was carried out with the sample outcome blinded until data analysis. Statistical analysis of the ELISA results was carried out using Graphpad Prism version 6.04 with significance testing done using unpaired two tailed Mann Whitney test.