ABSTRACT:
Background
Mycoplasma hyopneumoniae causes respiratory disease in swine and contributes to the porcine respiratory disease complex, a major disease problem in the swine industry. The M. hyopneumoniae strain 232 genome is one of the smallest and best annotated microbial genomes, containing only 728 annotated genes and 691 known proteins. Standard protein databases for mass spectrometry only allow for the identification of known and predicted proteins, which if incorrect can limit our understanding of the biological processes at work. Proteogenomic mapping is a methodology which allows the entire 6-frame genome translation of an organism to be used as a mass spectrometry database to help identify unknown proteins as well as correct and confirm existing annotations. This methodology will be employed to perform an in-depth analysis of the M. hyopneumoniae proteome.
Results
Proteomic analysis indicates 483 of 691 (70%) known M. hyopneumoniae strain 232 proteins are expressed under the culture conditions given in this study. Furthermore, 171 of 328 (52%) hypothetical proteins have been confirmed. Proteogenomic mapping resulted in the identification of previously unannotated genes gatC and rpmF and 5-prime extensions to genes mhp063, mhp073, and mhp451, all conserved and annotated in other M. hyopneumoniae strains and Mycoplasma species. Gene prediction with Prodigal, a prokaryotic gene predicting program, completely supports the new genomic coordinates calculated using proteogenomic mapping.
Conclusions
Proteogenomic mapping showed that the protein coding genes of the M. hyopneumoniae strain 232 identified in this study are well annotated. Only 1.8% of mapped peptides did not correspond to genes defined by the current genome annotation. This study also illustrates how proteogenomic mapping can be an important tool to help confirm, correct and append known gene models when using a genome sequence as search space for peptide mass spectra. Using a gene prediction program which scans for a wide variety of promoters can help ensure genes are accurately predicted or not missed completely. Furthermore, protein extraction using differential detergent fractionation effectively increases the number of membrane and cytoplasmic proteins identifiable my mass spectrometry.
Electronic supplementary material
The online version of this article (doi:10.1186/1471-2164-15-576) contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.
METHODS:
Methods
Sample preparation
Mycoplasma hyopneumoniae strain 232 was originally isolated from a pig infected with strain 11 , is fully virulent in low passage, and has been commonly used in challenge and pathogen studies in the United States. Four independent cultures (biological replicates) were grown in Friis broth , each split into two flasks (technical replicates), until the media color change indicated mid to late log phase of growth had been achieved (pH ~ 6.5). The cells were then centrifuged at 10,000 × g for 30 min, resuspended in phosphate buffered saline, and centrifuged again. This was repeated three additional times to remove medium contaminants. Of the eight replicates, six were reserved for shotgun proteomics analysis using an LTQ Velos Pro (Thermo Scientific) low resolution, high-throughput mass spectrometer, and the remaining two replicates were analyzed using an LTQ FT Ultra (Thermo Scientific) high resolution mass spectrometer.
No vertebrates subjects were involved in the culture and sample preparation of the M. hyopneumoniae during the course of this study. All procedures were performed within the research guidelines of the University of Arizona, Iowa State University, and the University of Technology, Sydney and did not require approval of an ethics committee.
Low resolution mass spectrometry
For the shotgun proteomics analysis, six cell pellets were subject to differential detergent fractionation as described by McCarthy et al. using the detergents digitonin, Tween 20 and SDS . After each detergent application, samples were centrifuged to separate solublized proteins from cellular debris. The insoluble pellet left after treatment was subject to trypsin digestion along with the soluble fractions, but could not be quantified. Fractions were normalized to 20 μg each and trypsin digestion as described by McCarthy et al. . Following digestion, each fraction was desalted using a peptide microtrap (Michrom BioResources) according to the manufacturer's instructions. After desalting, each fraction was further cleaned using a strong cation exchange (SCX) microtrap (Michrom BioResources) to remove any residual detergent, which could interfere with the mass spectrometry. Fractions were dried and resuspended in 10 μL of 2% acetonitrile (ACN), 0.1% formic acid (FA) and transferred to low retention vials in preparation for separation using 1D-LC.
The high performance liquid chromatography (HPLC) equipment used for peptide separation was an Ultimate 3000 (Dionex) operated in 1D-LC mode at a flow rate of 333 nL per min and equipped with a 0.075 mm × 100 mm column packed with Halo C18 material (Michrom BioResources) for reverse phase separation. Each sample was separated using a 4 h gradient from 2% to 50% Acetonitrile with 0.1% formic acid as a proton source. The column was located on the ion source and connected directly to a nanospray emitter to minimize peak broadening. Scan parameters for the LTQ Velos Pro were one MS scan followed by 20 MS/MS scans of the 20 most intense peaks using high energy collisional dissociation as the fragmentation method. Dynamic exclusion was enabled with a mass exclusion time of 3 min and a repeat count of 1 within 30 sec of initial m/z measurement.
High resolution mass spectrometry
The two cell pellets reserved for high resolution analysis were lysed and digested as described by Wilton et al. . Digested peptides were dried, resuspended in 20 mM KH2PO4, 20% ACN, pH 3 (Buffer A) in 2.5 μL and transferred to low retention vials in preparation for separation using an Ultimate 3000 configured for 2D-LC. Each sample was loaded at 15 μL/min onto an SCX microtrap (Michrom BioResources) for the first dimension of separation, involving SCX steps of Buffer A plus 0, 5, 10, 15, 20, 25, 30, 40, 50, 100, 250, 500, and 1000 mM KCl. For the second dimension of separation, each eluted salt step was desalted with an inline peptide microtrap (Michrom BioResources) with 2% ACN, 0.1% FA at 5 μL/min. Once desalted, the microtrap was switched into line with a fritless nano column (75 μm × ~10 cm) containing C18 media (5 μ, 200 Å Magic, Michrom) manufactured according to Gatlin . Peptides were eluted using a gradient of 2% to 36% ACN, 0.1% FA at 350 nL/min over 60 min and electrospray ionized for analysis using an LTQ FT Ultra mass spectrometer.
A survey scan m/z 350–1750 was acquired in the FT ion cyclotron resonance cell (Resolution = 100,000 at m/z 400, with an accumulation target value of 1,000,000 ions). Up to the 6 most abundant ions (>3,000 counts) with charge states > +2 were sequentially isolated and fragmented within the linear ion trap using collisionally induced dissociation with an activation q = 0.25 and activation time of 30 ms at a target value of 30,000 ions. M/z ratios selected for MS/ MS were dynamically excluded for 30 seconds.
Peptide identification
Database searches of the mass spectra were performed using both X!tandem  and OMSSA  algorithms. Spectra were searched against the reference proteome of Mycoplasma hyopneumoniae strain 232 (NCBI ftp, Sept. 5, 2012). A randomized version of the protein database was used for calculating false discovery rates. Searches were performed similarly for the LTQ Velos Pro and LTQ FT Ultra data sets, with the only difference being the precursor m/z tolerance being set to 0.4 Da and 10 ppm respectively. Fragment ion tolerance was set to 0.4 Da for all searches. Tryptic cleavage rules were used with up to two missed cleavages. The following potential amino acid modifications were used: 1) carbamidomethylation of Cysteine, 2) single and double oxidation of methionine, 3) phosphorylation of serine, threonine and tyrosine, and 4) water loss from serine and threonine. X!tandem also has an option to automatically test for pyrolidone derivatives of appropriate N-terminal amino acids; this was enabled. Additional file 4: Table S2 contains details on all the parameters used by X!tandem and OMSSA in this analysis. Peptide identifications were accepted as correct if the e-value for each spectrum-sequence match was 0.01 or less. Protein identifications were discarded if only a single peptide sequence was identified; only peptides uniquely identifying each protein were retained.
The Mycoplasma hyopneumoniae strain 232 reference genome sequence was downloaded from NCBI (Sept. 5, 2012) to be used as a database for proteogenomic mapping. A 6-frame translation of the genome according to translation code 4 (Mycoplasmas) was performed using Perl. Because of software memory constraints, the 6-frame translation was broken into sections 600 amino acids long, each with a 60 amino acid overlap with the previous, to avoid missing peptide identifications which might span sections. Database searches of the mass spectra were performed using both X!tandem  and OMSSA  algorithms in an identical manner to the protein searches. Peptide identifications were accepted as correct if the e-value for each spectrum-sequence match was 0.01 or less. Spitting the genome translation could cause protein sequences to be split across two or more fasta entries, therefore, all peptides were retained, not only those uniquely identifying each database entry. Entries identified by a single peptide were discarded.
Gene ontology of DDF fractions
Differential detergent fractionation was designed to separate proteins based on hydrophobicity. In this study, the detergents digitonin, Tween 20 and SDS were used in the order listed, of increasing strength, to prepare cells for low resolution analysis using the LTQ Velos Pro. Cells prepared for analysis using the LTQ FT Ultra were lysed and digested with no prefractionation. Identified proteins were organized by 1) DDF fraction, 2) all fractions combined and 3) non-DDF. GORetriever, an online tool available on AgBase ( http://agbase.msstate.edu/) , was used to collect GO cellular component terms for the three catagories as well as all 691 known M. hyopneumoniae proteins.
Proteogenomic mapping
Proteogenomic mapping was implemented using Perl to match identified peptide sequences to the NCBI reference genome for Mycoplasma hyopneumoniae stain 232 (NCBI ftp, Sept. 5, 2012). All identified peptide sequences were string matched to the 6-frame translations. The frame, direction and coordinates of each match were compared to the current annotation general feature format (GFF) file accompanying the genome download and subsequently sorted into preliminary categories. Matches in the same frame and within the boundaries of annotated ORFs were categorized as "annotated ORF". "ORF extensions" were defined by matches in frame with and overlapping the start coordinates of an ORF. "Intergenic" matches fell outside ORF coordinates. "Out-of-frame" matches were defined as any match within or overlapping an ORF, but in a different frame on the same strand. "Opposite strand" matches were also defined as any match within or overlapping an ORF, but on the complement strand. Once all matches were categorized, a GFF file was created allowing these to be viewed along side the current annotations in a genome browser for manual evaluation if necessary. "Annotated ORF" matches were discarded from further analysis since no new information is derived from these. All other types, "ORF extension", "Intergenic", "Out-of-frame" and "Opposite strand" matches were compiled into physically associated groups defined here as "mappings". To create mappings, each frame was scanned and matches between stop codons grouped together. The closest start and stop codons containing each group of matches were recorded; if no start was found, the start of the first match was used. When intergenic matches were grouped with any other type, the other type took precedence as the mappings final category. Any mapping with only a single peptide was discarded.
Prodigal, a prokaryote gene finding software, was used to analyze the M. hyopneumoniae genomic sequence to detect ribosomal binding sites and start codons . These predictions were compared to the start codons predicted through the proteogenomic mapping process using Perl.