ABSTRACT:
Fumagillin and its derivatives are therapeutically useful because they can decrease cancer progression. The specific molecular target of fumagillin is methionine aminopeptidase 2 (MetAP2), one of the two MetAPs present in the cytosol. MetAPs catalyze N-terminal methionine excision (NME), an essential pathway of cotranslational protein maturation. To date, it remains unclear the respective contribution of MetAP1 and MetAP2 to the NME process in vivo and why MetAP2 inhibition causes cell cycle arrest only in a subset of cells. Here, we performed a global characterization of the N-terminal methionine excision pathway and the inhibition of MetAP2 by fumagillin in a number of lines, including cancer cell lines. Large-scale N-terminus profiling in cells responsive and unresponsive to fumagillin treatment revealed that both MetAPs were required in vivo for M[VT]X-targets and, possibly, for lower-level M[G]X-targets. Interestingly, we found that the responsiveness of the cell lines to fumagillin was correlated with the ability of the cells to modulate their glutathione homeostasis. Indeed, alterations to glutathione status were observed in fumagillin-sensitive cells but not in cells unresponsive to this agent. Proteo-transcriptomic analyses revealed that both MetAP1 and MetAP2 accumulated in a cell-specific manner and that cell sensitivity to fumagillin was related to the levels of these MetAPs, particularly MetAP1. We suggest that MetAP1 levels could be routinely checked in several types of tumor and used as a prognostic marker for predicting the response to treatments inhibiting MetAP2.
METHODS:
MATERIALS AND METHODS
Chemicals
Modified porcine trypsin was obtained from Promega (Madison, WI); synthetic stable isotope-labeled peptides with C-terminal 15N- and 13C-labeled arginine residues were purchased in crude (PEPotec SRM Peptides) and purified form (AQUA peptides) for LC-SRM assays from Thermo Fisher Scientific (Ulm, Germany). All other reagents and chemicals were purchased from Sigma Aldrich (St. Louis, MO).
Cell culture and treatments
Cancer cell lines were obtained from the American Type Culture Collection (ATCC; Rockville, MD, USA). Human umbilical vein endothelial cells (HUVEC) were obtained from Clonetics (Lonza; Walkersville, MD, USA) and were cultured as described in the Supplementary Information and according to the supplier's instructions. For the proteomics and transcriptomics analysis 6.2×106 sensitive and insensitive cells were plated in petri dishes and cultured as described in the Supplementary Information. After 24 h medium is removed and changed with fresh medium containing or not 5μM fumagillin. Cells were cultured for additional 24h before collecting them for further analysis. Cell viability was assessed with the Promega CellTiter-Blue™ reagent, according to the manufacturer's instructions. After 24 h of culture, the cell medium was supplemented with 50 μL of the test compound dissolved in DMSO (<0.1% in each preparation). After incubation for 72 h, we added 20 μL resazurin and incubated the mixture for a further 2 h before recording fluorescence (λex=560 nm, λem=590 nm) in a Victor microtiter plate fluorimeter (Perkin Elmer, USA). Experiments were performed in triplicate.
Experimental design and statistical rationale
In this studies we compared fumagillin-sensitive and –insensitive lines. Especially for proteomic analysis, to have a broader significance, two cell lines of each class were analyzed. The selection of these lines is described in the first result section. The quality of the methodology used allowed us to characterize more than 1000 unique N-terminal peptides per cell lines (see proteomic analysis in Supplementary Information) allowing to decipher the in vivo substrate specificity of MetAPs in different conditions.
Except otherwise stated, all results were produced from at least 3 independent biological repeats (n) and when the mean is computed the associated standard error of the mean is given. The statistical significance is assessed by running a two-sided t-test (GraphPad Software) and the associated p-Value is shown as follow: * pVal<005, ** pVal<0.01, *** pVal<0.001, ns non-significant. For mass spectrometry analysis, the overall pipeline is given in Supplementary Figure 2 for clarity and the data processing is described in the mass spectrometry section in Supplementary Information. For MetAP2 and MetAP1 quantification, three peptides were used and multiple injections for each independent repeats. The associated data processing is described in the corresponding section in Supplementary Information. In addition, to assess the quality of the experiment, coefficients of variation are given (Supplementary Figure 9). The transcriptomic analysis was performed with first 10 references genes, the 4 most stables were kept for data normalization as described in corresponding sections.
MetAP mRNA quantification
Cell pellets were washed with DPBS. RNA was extracted with the NucleoSpin RNA kit (Macherey-Nagel), according to the manufacturer's instructions. The RNA was quantified and its quality was assessed using the Agilent 2100 Bioanalyzer with the eukaryote total RNA 6000 Nano assay. 1 μg of total RNA was reverse-transcribed in a 20 μL final reaction volume using the High Capacity cDNA Reverse Transcription Kit (Life Technologies) with RNase inhibitor according to the manufacturer's instructions. Quantitative PCR for MetAP1, MetAP2 and reference genes was performed using 10 ng cDNA with TaqMan Real-Time PCR assays (Life Technologies). 10 reference genes have been tested and the two most stable genes (18S and PPIA) selected by GeneX software (GeneX Gene Expression Database) were used to normalize the data. The TaqMan Real-Time PCR assays used are: MetAP1-Hs00299385_m1, MetAP2-Hs00199152_m1, 18S-Hs99999901_s1 and PPIA-Hs99999904_m1.
N-terminal proteomic analysis
Proteomic analyses were performed essentially as previously described. Further details are provided in the Supplementary Information.
Determination of MetAP2 and MetAP1 proteins accumulation by LC-SRM
Three human cell lines (HUVEC, U87 and K562) were studied. Cells were lysed and proteins were extracted, reduced, alkylated, and precipitated. Proteins were digested with trypsin, in solution, and the resulting tryptic peptides were desalted by SPE and analyzed by microLC-SRM. A first experiment was performed with six crude synthetic peptides specific to MetAP2 and MetAP1, for the relative quantification of MetAP2 in three cell lines. We then carried out a second experiment with one highly purified and precisely quantified AQUA peptide, for the absolute quantification of MetAP2. Further details are provided in the Supplementary Information.
Glutathione quantification and cell cycle analysis
Glutathione determinations were carried out essentially as described by Rahman et al.. Cells were harvested by centrifugation, and the resulting cell pellet was washed with DPBS. The different forms of glutathione were extracted in a buffer containing sulfosalicylic acid to inhibit γ-glutamyl-transferase, by sonication. The enzymatic reaction of the glutathione reductase was used for quantification. Oxidized glutathione was specifically quantified by treating the lysate with 2-vinylpyridine, which inactivates reduced glutathione. Rates of enzymatic activity were recorded and compared with a glutathione standard curve. Cell cycle analysis was performed according to a standard procedure based on propidium iodide staining. Cells were harvested, fixed and stored in ethanol at -20°C until analysis. They were then incubated for 30 minutes with RNase and stained by incubation with 50 μg/mL−1 propidium iodide for 15 minutes. Cell cycle profiles were acquired with an FC500 cytometer (Beckman-Coulter).