ABSTRACT:
External perturbations, by forcing cells to adapt to a new environment, often elicit large-scale changes in gene expression resulting in an altered proteome that improves the cell’s fitness in the new conditions. Steady-state levels of a proteome depend on transcription, the levels of transcripts, translation and protein degradation but system-level contribution that each of these processes make to the final protein expression change has yet to be explored. We therefore applied a systems biology approach to characterize the regulation of protein expression during cellular differentiation using quantitative proteomics. As a general rule, it seems that protein expression during cellular differentiation is largely controlled by changes in the relative synthesis rate, whereas the relative degradation rate of the majority of proteins stays constant. In these data, we also observe that the proteins in defined sub-structures of larger protein complexes tend to have highly correlated synthesis and degradation rates but that this does not necessarily extend to the holo-complex. Finally, we provide strong evidence that the generally poor correlation observed between transcript and protein levels can fully be explained once the protein synthesis and degradation rates are taken into account.
METHODS:
Materials and methods
Identifying changes in the proteome during differentiation of THP-1 and C2C12 cells
THP-1 or C2C12 cells were grown in RPMI or DMEM media, respectively, with added 10% dialyzed fetal bovine serum (FBS), 1% glutamine, 1% non-essential amino acids, 1% penicillin/streptomycin and (L-[U-13C6,14N4]arginine and L-[2H4]lysine or L-[U-12C6,14N4]arginine [1H4]lysine or L-[U-13C6,15N4]arginine and L-[U-13C6,15N2]lysine (Cambridge Isotope Labs, Cambridge, MA). The cells were grown for at least five doublings to ensure 100% incorporation of labeled amino acids before THP-1 cells were differentiated by 25 nM PMA and C2C12 cells were differentiated by increasing the confluency to 100% while decreasing the serum concentration to 2%.
Peptide separation and MS
The cells were washed three times in PBS and lysed in 1% deoxycholate before being boiled for 5 min. The lysate was digested to peptides as in before being separated by IEF (Agilent Technology) following the manufacturers’ instructions. The separated peptides were STAGE Tipped as in before being analyzed by MS as in and proteins were identified and quantified using MaxQuant with the settings as supplied in Supplementary methods. The mass spectrometry data acquired here have been deposited to the ProteomeXchange Consortium (http://proteomecentral.proteomexchange.org) via the PRIDE partner repository with the data set identifier PXD000328.
Data analysis
Significantly changing proteins were identified by applying ANOVA between the five time points with the following settings (permutation-based FDR, P=0.05, S0=1, 250 randomizations) using Perseus. Increasing and decreasing proteins were defined by clustering the data into two clusters using fuzzy C mean clustering. Wilcoxon–Mann–Whitney test, partial least regression, and KEN-box motif determination were performed using Matlab (http://www.mathworks.com), whereas correlation coefficients and 2D enrichment analysis (P<0.05, Benjamini-Hochberg FDR for truncation) of the biological processed (Uniprot Keywords) were performed in Perseus, similarly to. In boxplots, points were drawn as outliers if they were larger than q3+1.5 (q3−q1) or smaller than q3−1.5 (q3−q1).
Finally, enrichment (Uniprot Keywords) analysis of changing proteins, synthesis and degradation rates were performed by GPROX using Fisher’s exact test (P<0.05, Benjamini-Hochberg FDR for truncation).
For further detail, see Supplementary methods.