ABSTRACT:
Abstract
Lysine acetylation is a frequently occurring posttranslational modification; however, little is known about the origin and regulation of most sites. Here we used quantitative mass spectrometry to analyze acetylation dynamics and stoichiometry in Saccharomyces cerevisiae. We found that acetylation accumulated in growth‐arrested cells in a manner that depended on acetyl‐CoA generation in distinct subcellular compartments. Mitochondrial acetylation levels correlated with acetyl‐CoA concentration in vivo and acetyl‐CoA acetylated lysine residues nonenzymatically in vitro. We developed a method to estimate acetylation stoichiometry and found that the vast majority of mitochondrial and cytoplasmic acetylation had a very low stoichiometry. However, mitochondrial acetylation occurred at a significantly higher basal level than cytoplasmic acetylation, consistent with the distinct acetylation dynamics and higher acetyl‐CoA concentration in mitochondria. High stoichiometry acetylation occurred mostly on histones, proteins present in histone acetyltransferase and deacetylase complexes, and on transcription factors. These data show that a majority of acetylation occurs at very low levels in exponentially growing yeast and is uniformly affected by exposure to acetyl‐CoA.
METHODS:
Materials and Methods
Yeast growth and lysate preparation
Wild‐type Saccharomyces cerevisiae cells (BY4742, MATalpha his3Δ1 leu2Δ0 lys2Δ0 ura3Δ0; ThermoFisher Scientific, Slangerup, Denmark), pda1Δ (BY4742, pda1::KanMX; ThermoFisher Scientific), and cit1Δ (BY4742, cit1::KanMX; Open Biosystems) were cultured in synthetic complete media (US Biological, Salem, MA, USA) supplemented with 12C614N2‐lysine (SILAC “light”) or 13C615N2‐lysine (SILAC “heavy”). Cells were harvested at the indicated time points, washed once with sterile H2O, and resuspended in lysis buffer (50 mM Tris, pH7.5, 150 mM NaCl, 1 mM EDTA, 1x mini complete protease inhibitor cocktail (Roche, Basel, Switzerland), 5 mM sodium fluoride, 1 mM sodium orthovanadate, 5 mM beta‐glycerophosphate, 10 mM nicotinamide, and 5 μM tricostatin A) at ~50 OD600 cells/ml lysis buffer. The cell suspension was frozen drop‐wise in liquid nitrogen and ground in a liquid nitrogen chilled steel container by the Retsch MM 400 Ball Mill (Retsch, Haan, Germany) for 5 min at 25 Hz. The lysate was thawed, NP‐40 and sodium deoxycholate were added to a final concentration of 1 and 0.1%, respectively, and clarified by centrifugation. The lysate supernatent was precipitated with four volumes −20°C acetone. The acetone precipitate was dissolved in urea solution (6 M urea, 2 M thio‐urea, 10 mM Hepes pH8.0) and protein concentration determined by Quick‐Start Bradford assay (Bio‐Rad, Copenhagen, Denmark).
Chemical acetylation of BSA and yeast lysate
For treatment of BSA with acetyl‐CoA, BSA was prepared in PBS (pH 7.2) at 10 mg/ml and mixed with 1/10 volume acetyl‐CoA (Sigma, Copenhagen, Denmark) prepared fresh in H2O. Reactions were incubated at 30°C for 4 h and stopped by addition of nine volumes −20°C acetone. Acetone precipitated protein was resuspended in 200 μl of 100 mM triethyl ammonium bicarbonate (TEAB) and digested to peptides by addition of 1/100 (w/w) trypsin protease (Sigma) and incubation at 37°C for 16 h. Tryptic peptides were labeled with TMT sixplex isobaric mass tags (ThermoFisher Scientific) according to the manufacturer's instructions. Chemical acetylation with acetic anhydride was performed as described (Guan et al, 2010). Briefly, 20 ml of 1 mg/ml BSA (Sigma) was prepared in 0.1 M Na2CO3. 100 μl acetic anhydride (Sigma) was added slowly over 10 min in a glass beaker with constant stirring, followed by 400 μl pyridine (Sigma) over 30 min, also with constant stirring. The reaction was then left to incubate at room temperature for 4 h and quenched by addition of 400 μl 1 M Tris‐base (Sigma). Organic solvents were removed by five rounds of centrifuge filtration in an Amicon Ultra 15 (Millipore, Billerica, MA, USA) with a 10 kD molecular weight cutoff. For treatment with AcP, BSA was prepared in yeast lysis buffer (as above, with NP‐40 and deoxycholate added) at a concentration of 20 mg/ml. Yeast lysate was similarly prepared at a concentration of 20 mg/ml. BSA or yeast lysate was then mixed with 1/10 volume of H2O or AcP [freshly prepared in H2O, potassium lithium salt (Sigma)] at either 100 mM or 1 M concentration for a final concentration of 10 or 100 mM AcP, respectively. Reactions were incubated at 37°C for 90 min. BSA was mixed with 4x nuPAGE SDS‐polyacrylamide loading buffer (Life Technologies, Naerum, Denmark) and separated by SDS‐polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis using NuPAGE gels (Life Technologies). In‐gel tryptic digestion and peptide isolation were performed essentially as described (Shevchenko et al, 1996). For yeast lysate, the reactions were stopped by addition of 5–10 volumes −20°C acetone and incubated at −20°C for 1–2 h. Acetone precipitated protein was resuspended in 8 M urea solution (6 M urea, 2 M thio‐urea, 10 mM Hepes pH8.0) and the concentration determined by Quick Start Bradford assay (BioRad). Equal amounts of protein were mixed, diluted to 2 M urea by addition of 3 volume 50 mM Hepes, pH8.5, proteolyzed by addition of 1:200 (w/w) trypsin protease (Sigma) for 16–20 h at room temperature. Peptides were purified by C18 Sep‐Pack classic cartridge (Waters, Waltham, MA, USA). Peptides were acidified by addition of trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) to 1% and applied to a Sep‐Pack column that was pre‐equilibrated with 5 ml acetonitrile and twice with 5 ml 0.1% TFA. The column was washed twice with 5 ml 0.1% TFA and once with 5 ml H2O. Peptides were eluted with 3 ml 50% acetonitrile in H20, 100 μl of 10x IP buffer (500 mM MOPS, pH 7.2, 500 mM NaCl) was added, and the acetonitrile was removed by vacuum centrifugation to a final volume of ~1 ml. Peptide concentration was determined by absorbance at 280 nm using a nanodrop (ThermoFisher Scientific) spectrophotometer (~6 mg/ml). An aliquot of 200 μg peptides was set aside for subsequent proteome analysis and the remaining peptides were used for acetyllysine enrichment (described below).
Peptide preparation, acetyllysine enrichment, and peptide fractionation
In‐solution protein digestion, peptide purification, and acetyllysine peptide enrichment were performed essentially as described (Kim et al, 2006; Weinert et al, 2013a). Immuno‐enriched peptides were eluted from anti‐acetyllysine antibody resin using acidified H2O [0.2% trifluoroacetic acid (TFA)]. Peptide eluates were loaded directly onto a strong cation exchange (SCX) microtip column prepared as described (Rappsilber et al, 2007; Wisniewski et al, 2009). Peptide eluates were briefly evaporated to remove acetonitrile and then loaded onto C18 stage‐tips as described (Rappsilber et al, 2007). Proteome measurements were made by fractionation of total peptides by the SCX microcolumn method and analyzed by mass spectrometry.
Quantitative mass spectrometric analysis
We used stable isotope labeling with amino acids in cell culture (SILAC; Ong et al, 2002), to measure changes in protein, lysine acetylation, and phosphorylation abundance. Peptide fractions were analyzed by online nanoflow LC‐MS/MS using a Proxeon easy nLC system (ThermoFisher Scientific) connected to an LTQ Orbitrap Velos (ThermoFisher Scientific) or Q‐Exactive (ThermoFisher Scientific) mass spectrometer. The LTQ Orbitrap Velos instrument was operated under Xcalibur 2.1 (ThermoFisher Scientific) with the LTQ Orbitrap Tune Plus Developers Kit version 2.6.0.1042 software in the data dependent mode to automatically switch between MS and MS/MS acquisition as described (Weinert et al, 2011). The Q‐Exactive was operated using Xcalibur 2.2 (ThermoFisher Scientific) in the data dependent mode to automatically switch between MS and MS/MS acquisition as described (Michalski et al, 2011; Kelstrup et al, 2012). All quantitative MS experiments performed in this study are summarized in Supplementary Table S1. The mass spectrometry proteomics data have been deposited to the ProteomeXchange Consortium (http://proteomecentral.proteomexchange.org) via the PRIDE partner repository (Vizcaino et al, 2013) with the dataset identifier PXD000507.
Peptide identification and computational analysis
Raw data files were processed using MaxQuant software (developer version 1.2.7.1) as described (http://www.maxquant.org/; Cox et al, 2011). Parent ion (MS) and fragment (MS2) spectra were searched against the Saccharomyces Genome Database (SGD) genome release r63, January 5, 2010. The search was performed using the integrated Andromeda search engine and both forward and reversed (decoy) versions of the databases (Cox et al, 2011). Peptides were additionally filtered for a minimum posterior error probability (PEP) score of 0.01, resulting in data sets with estimated false discovery rates that were less than the standard 1% used in most proteomic studies (Supplementary Table S1). Quantification of TMT mass tags may be inaccurate if additional peptides are co‐isolated with the targeted peptide ion (Ting et al, 2011). In order to minimize this effect we restricted the quantification of TMT mass tags to MS/MS scans in which the targeted parent ion constituted a minimum of 90% of the total ion current. Mass recalibration was performed using high confidence identifications based on a initial “first search” using a 20 part per million (ppm) mass tolerance for parent ion masses and 20 ppm (HCD) or 0.5 Dalton (CID) for fragment ions. Spectra were subsequently searched with a mass tolerance of 6 ppm for parent ions and 20 ppm (HCD) or 0.5 Dalton (CID) for fragment ions, with strict trypsin specificity, and allowing up to two missed cleavage sites. Cysteine carbamidomethylation was searched as a fixed modification, whereas N‐acetyl protein and oxidized methionine were searched as variable modifications. Where appropriate, acetyllysine was added as a variable modification.
Acetyl‐CoA assay
Frozen yeast pellets (~100 OD600 nm) were deproteinized in 400 μl 1 N perchloric acid (PCA) containing 13C2 acetyl‐CoA as an internal standard (ISTD), mixed with 200 μl 0.4 mm acid washed glass‐beads and vortexed for 2 min at 4°C. Homogenates were centrifuged for 10 min, 10 000 g at 4°C. Supernatant (200 μl) was neutralized by adding repeated aliquots (10 μl) of 3 M KHCO3 under constant vortexing, until bubble evolution ceases (90 μl in total). KClO4 was pelleted by centrifugation for 5 min, 10 000 g at 4°C. Acetyl‐CoA from the supernatant was measured as described previously, using ISTD for calibration (Magnes et al, 2008). Results were normalized to OD 600 nm measured after extraction.
AQUA analysis
Yeast strains expressing GFP‐tagged Pgk1 and Fas2 at endogenous levels from the chromosomal locus (Huh et al, 2003) were obtained from Life Technologies. Protein extracts were prepared exactly as above when treating whole cell lysate with AcP. After treatment with AcP (or mock‐treatment) the GFP‐tagged proteins were enriched using GFP‐trap affinity resin (ChromoTek, Martinsried, Germany) and the proteins eluted by boiling in 2x tris glycine sample buffer (Life Technologies). Proteins were resolved on precast tris glycine gels (Life Technologies) and peptides recovered by standard in‐gel digestion (Shevchenko et al, 1996). Heavy‐labeled AQUA peptide standards (AQUA quant pro; ThermoFisher Scientific) were mixed with Pgk1 and Fas2 peptides at the indicated concentrations and analyzed by MS. Untreated protein was analyzed in four independent experiments and AcP‐treated protein in two independent experiments, all with comparable results.
Data analysis
Gene Ontology (GO) association and enrichment analysis was performed using the Database for Annotation, Visualization and Integrated Discovery (DAVID) v6.7 (da Huang et al, 2009). Statistical tests were performed using R (http://www.r-project.org/index.html). Box plots were generated using Sparklines for Excel (http://sparklines-excel.blogspot.com/). The detection limit for naturally occurring acetylated peptides used to calculate minimum increased acetylation in Fig 5G was determined by ranking the observed “heavy” labeled peptides by peptide intensity and calculating the median intensity of the bottom 10%. This intensity value was an order of magnitude higher than the least intense “heavy” peptide observed in our experiments, thus the estimates of increased acetylation based on this detection limit are conservative.