ABSTRACT:
Background
Sensitivity and throughput of transcriptomic and proteomic technologies have advanced tremendously in recent years. With the use of deep sequencing of RNA samples (RNA-seq) and mass spectrometry technology for protein identification and quantitation, it is now feasible to compare gene and protein expression on a massive scale and for any organism for which genomic data is available. Although these technologies are currently applied to many research questions in various model systems ranging from cell cultures to the entire organism level, there are few comparative studies of these technologies in the same system, let alone on the same samples. Here we present a comparison between gene and protein expression in embryos of zebrafish, which is an upcoming model in disease studies.
Results
We compared Agilent custom made expression microarrays with Illumina deep sequencing for RNA analysis, showing as expected a high degree of correlation of expression of a common set of 18,230 genes. Gene expression was also found to correlate with the abundance of 963 distinct proteins, with several categories of genes as exceptions. These exceptions include ribosomal proteins, histones and vitellogenins, for which biological and technical explanations are discussed.
Conclusions
By comparing state of the art transcriptomic and proteomic technologies on samples derived from the same group of organisms we have for the first time benchmarked the differences in these technologies with regard to sensitivity and bias towards detection of particular gene categories in zebrafish. Our datasets submitted to public repositories are a good starting point for researchers interested in disease progression in zebrafish at a stage of development highly suited for high throughput screening technologies.
METHODS:
Methods
Zebrafish larvae
Zebrafish were handled in compliance with local animal welfare regulations and maintained according to standard protocols (http://zfin.org). The breeding of adult fish was approved by the local animal welfare committee (DEC) of the University of Leiden, The Netherlands. All protocols adhered to the international guidelines specified by the EU Animal Protection Directive 86/609/EEC. Ten parent zebrafish couples were kept separately from one another for mating the following week. Embryos were grown at 28°C in egg water (60 μg/ml Instant ocean sea salt, Sera Marin). The egg water was refreshed every day. At 5 DPI, approximately 200 embryos per condition were collected and snap-frozen in liquid nitrogen. The frozen embryos were ground to homogeneity with a pipet tip and split into two portions that were stored at −80°C. One part was used for RNA sample preparation and the other part for protein sample preparation.
RNA isolation
Embryos were homogenized in 1 ml of TRIzol reagent (Invitrogen), and total RNA was extracted according to the manufacturer’s instructions. RNA samples were treated with DNaseI (Ambion) to remove residual genomic DNA. RNA integrity was analysed on an Electrophoresis BioAnalyzer (Agilent Technologies). The average RIN value of the RNA samples was 9.7 with a minimum of 9.5.
Microarrays
For microarrays analysis 500 ng total RNA was combined with Spike A and amplified according to the Agilent Two-Color Microarray-Based Gene Expression Analysis guide version 5.5 (G4140-90050, Agilent technologies). In order to exclude dye bias we have labelled all used sample either with Cy3 or Cy5 label. Amino-allyl modified nucleotides were incorporated during the aRNA synthesis (2.5 mM rGAC (GE Healthcare), 0.75 mM rUTP (GE Healthcare), 0.75 mM AA-rUTP (TriLink Biotechnologies). Synthesized aRNA was purified with the E.Z.N.A. MicroElute RNA Clean Up Kit (Omega Bio-Tek). The quality was inspected on the BioAnalyzer (Agilent Technologies) with the Agilent RNA 6000 kit (5067–1511, Agilent Technologies). 5 μg of aRNA was dried down and dissolved in 50 mM carbonate buffer pH 8.5. Individual vials of Cy3/Cy5 from the mono-reactive dye packs (GE Healthcare) were dissolved in 200 μl DMSO. To each sample, 10 μl of the appropriate CyDye dissolved in DMSO was added and the mixture was incubated for 1 h. Reactions were quenched with the addition of 5 μl 4 M hydroxylamine (Sigma-Aldrich). The labeled aRNA was purified with the E.Z.N.A. MicroElute RNA Clean Up Kit. Yields of aRNA and CyDye incorporation were measured on the NanoDrop ND-1000 (Thermo Scientific).
Each hybridization mixture was made up from 825 ng Cy3 and 825 ng Cy5 material. Hybridization mixtures were made as described in the Agilent Two-Color Microarray-Based Gene Expression Analysis guide version 5.5 (G4140-90050, Agilent technologies). The samples were loaded onto 4x180k D. rerio micro-arrays (Design ID:028233, Agilent Technologies) and hybridized for 17 hours at 65°C. Afterwards the slides were washed and scanned (20 bit, 3 μm resolution) in an ozone-free room with the Agilent G2505C scanner as described in the Agilent Two-Color Microarray-Based Gene Expression Analysis guide version 5.5 (G4140-90050, Agilent technologies). Data was extracted with Feature Extraction (v10.7.3.1, Agilent Technologies) with the GE2_107_Sep09 protocol for two-color Agilent micro-arrays.
Micro-array data was processed using Rosetta Resolver 7.2 (Rosetta Biosoftware). The raw micro-array data have been deposited in the NCBI GEO database as part of a larger experiment directed at studying disease progression accepted as project GSE44226. Gene expression values were obtained from the control sample channels (two Cy3, two Cy5) using the limma package for R/Bioconductor. Raw data were background-corrected, after which the channels containing infection sample were replaced by the control sample from the same array, resulting in two identical data sets per array. These data were loess and quantile normalized within and between arrays, respectively.
Transcriptome sequencing
The same RNA as used for the microarray analysis was used for constructing libraries for RNA deep sequencing. A total of 3 μg of RNA was used to make RNA-Seq libraries using the Illumina TruSeq RNA Sample Preparation Kit v2 (Illumina Inc., San Diego, USA). In the manufacturer’s instructions two modifications were made. In the adapter ligation step 1 μl instead of 2.5 μl adaptor was used. In the library size selection step the library fragments were isolated with a double Ampure XP purification with a 0.7x beads-to-library ratio. The mRNA-seq library was sequenced single-end, with a read length of 51 nucleotides, in a single lane on an Illumina GAIIx sequencer according to the manufacturer's recommendations. Base-calling was performed by the Illumina pipeline. Low quality nucleotides were removed from the sequencing reads using the trim function of the CLC Genomics Workbench (version 4.0, CLC bio, Aarhus, Denmark). Subsequently, reads were aligned to the Zv9 zebrafish genome assembly annotated by Ensembl (http://www.ensembl.org, release 62) using the short read mapper implemented in the Genomics Workbench, allowing up to 1 mismatch per sequence. The deep sequencing data sets have also been deposited in the NCBI GEO database as a reference series GSE44352. The Perl and R scripts used in the data analysis are available on http://ms-utils.org/zebrafish.
Proteomics
Zebrafish larvae were ground with a pestle in liquid nitrogen in 1.5 mL Eppendorf tubes and vortexed for 30 seconds in a lysis buffer consisting of 9 parts 20 mM Tris–HCl, pH 8.5, 20 mM NaCl and 1 part protease inhibitor cocktail (P 8340, Sigma-Aldrich). The samples were placed on a shaking table for 20 minutes at room temperature before spinning down cellular debris at 16,100 × g for 10 minutes at 4°C. The supernatant was transferred to a fresh tube and the supernatants as well as the remaining pellets frozen in −35°C. Five μL NuPAGE® LSD Sample Buffer (Invitrogen) was added to 20 μL, 20 μg protein, as measured by the bicinchoninic acid (BCA) protein assay (ThermoScientific), and loaded in each lane on a 10-lane 4-12% NuPAGE® Bis-Tris gel. The assembled Invitrogen XCell SureLock™ Mini-Cell was filled with SDS-MOPS Running Buffer and the separation run for 1 hour at 200 V. The gel was released from its casing and immersed in NuPAGE® SureStain Colloidal Blue (55 mL deionized water, 20 mL methanol, 20 mL “Stain A” and 5 mL “Stain B”) and left on a shaker overnight at room temperature. The staining solution was decanted and the gels were washed with deionized water before being scanned in an OptiGo UV imager (Isogen Life Science, De Meern, the Netherlands).
The gel lanes were cut into 48 identical slices fractions using a custom-made OneTouch Mount and Lane Picker (The Gel Company, San Francisco, CA). The gel slices were then removed with a Acu-Min® stainless steel Precision Probe with a 35° Single Bend Tip (#6) (Moody Tools Inc., Warwick, RI) and each slice placed into one well in a 96-well polypropylene PCR plate (Greiner Bio-One, Frickenhausen Germany). Using 50 and 250 μL Rainin 8-channel multi-pipettors, each gel slice was washed for 5 minutes at room temperature with 100 μL 25 mM ammonium bicarbonate (ABC), followed by a wash with 100 μL 30% acetonitrile in 25 mM ABC for 10 minutes and a final wash of 100 μL 80% acetonitrile in 25 mM ABC for 10 minutes, discarding the solution between each wash. Cystines were reduced by addition of 75 μL 10 mM DTT in 25 mM ABC and the plate incubated at 56°C for 20 minutes. After discarding the DTT solution, cysteines were alkylated by addition of 75 μL 55 mM iodoacetamide in 25 mM ABC with incubation at room temperature in darkness for 20 minutes. The gel pieces were washed again as above and the supernatant discarded. The proteins were digested in-gel by addition of 15 μL 5 ng/μL porcine trypsin (Promega, Madison, WI) and incubation for 6 hours at 37°C, after which the digestion was quenched with the addition of 1 μL 5% trifluoroacetic acid (TFA). The solution was removed, followed by a second extraction with 20 μL 0.1% TFA for 1 h and the solution pooled with the first extraction. The plate was stored at −35°C until analysis by LC-MS/MS.
All SDS-PAGE fractions were analyzed by LC-MS/MS using a splitless NanoLC-Ultra 2D plus (Eksigent, Dublin, CA) for parallel ultra-high pressure liquid chromatography (UHPLC) with an additional loading pump for fast sam-ple loading and desalting. The UHPLC system was configured with 300 μm-i.d. 5-mm PepMap C18 trap columns (Thermo Scientific, Sunnyvale, CA), 15-cm 300 μm-i.d. ChromXP C18 columns supplied by Eksigent and running 90-minute linear gradients from 4 to 33% acetonitrile in 0.05% formic acid. The UHPLC system was coupled on-line to an HCTultra PTM Discovery System ion trap (Bruker Daltonics, Bremen, Germany). After each MS scan, up to ten abundant multiply charged species in m/z 300–1300 were automatically selected for MS/MS but excluded for one minute after being selected twice. The UHPLC system was controlled using the HyStar3.4 with a plug-in from Eksigent and the HCTultra ion trap by esquireControl 6.2, all from Bruker.
Peptides and proteins were identified using Mascot 2.4 running on an 8-CPU in-house server and the Danio rerio UniProt database (20130814) and validated using PeptideProphet and ProteinProphet in the Trans-Proteomic Pipeline. In the Mascot search, a peptide mass measurement tolerance of [−0.5, 2.5] Da was used with MS/MS mass measurement tolerance [−0.5, 0.5] Da and allowing one missed cleavage. Carbamidylation of cysteine was included as the only fixed modication and oxidation of methionine as the only variable modification. Protein names from UniProt were matched against the microarray transcript (gene) names, expanding each protein group to individual proteins to match as many genes as possible, bearing in mind that not all of these proteins or protein isoforms are independently quantified.