ABSTRACT:
Protein and transcript levels are partly decoupled as a function of translation efficiency and protein degradation. Selective protein degradation via the Ubiquitin-26S proteasome system (UPS) ensures protein homeostasis and facilitates adjustment of protein abundance during changing environmental conditions. Since individual leaf tissues have specialized functions, their protein composition is different and hence also protein level regulation is expected to differ. To understand UPS function in a tissue-specific context we developed a method termed Meselect to effectively and rapidly separate Arabidopsis thaliana leaf epidermal, vascular and mesophyll tissues. Epidermal and vascular tissue cells are separated mechanically, while mesophyll cells are obtained after rapid protoplasting. The high yield of proteins was sufficient for tissue-specific proteome analyses after inhibition of the proteasome with the specific inhibitor Syringolin A (SylA) and affinity enrichment of ubiquitylated proteins. SylA treatment of leaves resulted in the accumulation of 225 proteins and identification of 519 ubiquitylated proteins. Proteins that were exclusively identified in the three different tissue types are consistent with specific cellular functions. Mesophyll cell proteins were enriched for plastid membrane translocation complexes as targets of the UPS. Epidermis enzymes of the TCA cycle and cell wall biosynthesis specifically accumulated after proteasome inhibition, and in the vascular tissue several enzymes involved in glucosinolate biosynthesis were found to be ubiquitylated. Our results demonstrate that protein level changes and UPS protein targets are characteristic of the individual leaf tissues and that the proteasome is relevant for tissue-specific functions.
METHODS:
Materials and methods
Plant growth and inhibition of the proteasome
Seeds of Arabidopsis thaliana ecotype Col-0 were stratified for 2 days in darkness at 4°C and afterwards grown in short day conditions with 8 h light and 16 h darkness for 55 days at 22°C, 70% humidity The proteasome was inhibited by spraying the adaxial epidermis of leaves with 10 μM Syringolin A in 0.02% (v/v) Tween 20. As a mock control leaves were sprayed with 0.02% (v/v) Tween 20 only. The whole rosette was treated 30–60 min before the end of the night period and leaves were harvested 8 h after treatment. SylA was produced as described in Svozil et al. and was kindly provided by R. Dudler (University of Zurich, Switzerland). The experiment was performed in three biological replicates.
Separation of the different leaf tissues with the Meselect method
After harvesting of the leaf, the TAPE sandwich method (Wu et al.,) was applied to remove the abaxial epidermis from the leaf. For this, the leaf was positioned between two tape stripes and the tape facing the abaxial epidermis was removed. The tape containing the abaxial epidermis was incubated for 15 min in protoplasting solution (1% cellulase Onozuka RS (Yakult, Japan), 0.25% macerozyme Onozuka R10 (Yakult, Japan), 0.4 M mannitol, 10 mM CaCl2, 20 mM KCl, 0.1% BSA and 20 mM MES, pH 5.7) under constant agitation at 50 rpm. During this process spongy mesophyll cells adhering to the epidermis are released into the solution, but the epidermis remains attached to the tape. The tape including epidermis was washed twice in washing buffer (154 mM NaCl, 125 mM CaCl2, 5 mM KCl, 5 mM glucose, and 2 mM MES, pH 5.7) and frozen in liquid nitrogen. After freezing, the epidermis could be easily removed from the tape with pre-cooled tweezers and scrapers. The epidermis was collected in a pre-cooled mortar, ground, and the tissue powder was stored at −80°C until further processing. The remainder of the leaf without the abaxial epidermis that was attached to the other tape was incubated for about 1 h in protoplast solution, which releases the palisade and spongy mesophyll cells into solution. The mesophyll protoplasts were collected by centrifugation at 200 × g for 2 min at 4°C and washed twice with washing buffer. After complete removal of the buffer, the protoplasts were frozen in liquid nitrogen and stored at −80°C until further processing. The tape with the remaining attached upper epidermal and vascular tissue was immersed in cold washing buffer. The vascular tissue network was removed with a tweezer, washed twice in washing buffer, frozen in liquid nitrogen, and stored at −80°C until further processing. The remainder of the tape with the attached adaxial epidermis was discarded because the specificity of the enrichment could not be confirmed for this tissue.
To verify the enrichment of different leaf tissues types the Arabidopsis GAL4-GFP enhancer trap lines with specific GFP expression in the epidermis (KC464), the vasculature (KC274) and the and mesophyll (JR11-2) were used (Gardner et al.,) (kindly provided by Alex Webb, UK). The leaves of the JR11-2 line in the C24 ecotype background were too fragile for the Meselect method. The line was therefore backcrossed four times in the Col-0 ecotype background to yield sufficiently robust leaves for the generation of the tissue type-specific protein preparations.
Preparation of the tissue type-specific protein extracts and Western Blot analysis
For the preparation of the whole leaf and tissue type specific protein extracts the frozen plant material was ground with a mortar and pestle and proteins were extracted by incubation with SDS buffer [4% SDS, 40 mM Tris-base, 5 mM MgCl2, 2x protease inhibitor mix (Roche)] for 20 min at room temperature (RT). Non-soluble material was pelleted by centrifugation at RT for 10 min at 16,200 × g. The supernatant was subsequently cleared by ultracentrifugation at RT for 45 min at 100,000 × g. The SDS extract of epidermal cells was processed quickly and could not be stored, neither frozen nor at RT, since proteins will precipitate.
For mass spectrometry measurements, 50–150 μg of protein, depending on the tissue type, were subjected to SDS PAGE on 10% SDS gels. After electrophoretic separation of the proteins, the proteins were stained with Coomassie brilliant blue R250 and each lane was cut into 5 sections. Tryptic digest of the proteins and extraction of the peptides was carried out as described (Svozil et al.,).
For the Western Blots 15 μg of each extract were electrophoretically separated with SDS PAGE on 10% SDS gels. After blotting, the nitrocellulose membranes were cut horizontally in two halves. The lower parts were probed with α-GFP (1:1000 dilution, Roche) and α-mouse antibodies (1:5000, Roche), and the upper parts with α-HSP90 (1:3000, Agrisera) and α-rabbit (1:3000, Roche) antibodies. After detection of the immunofluorescence signal the membranes were stained with Coomassie R250.
Affinity enrichment experiment
Frozen plant material was ground with a mortar and pestle. Mesophyll tissue cells were collected from 8 to 10 leaves each of three, vascular tissue of nine, and abaxial epidermal tissue of four plants. Proteins from mesophyll cells were extracted as described previously with a sequential extraction using native and urea buffer (Svozil et al.,). Proteins from vascular tissue or epidermal cells were extracted only with urea buffer. For the pre-clearing step 500 μg protein of mesophyll and vascular tissue in a total volume of 700–1200 μl and 400 μg protein of epidermal tissue in a total volume of 1800 μl were each washed with 100 μl sepharose CL4B (Sigma-Aldrich). The remaining affinity enrichment method was performed as described previously (Svozil et al.,).
Mass spectrometry measurements
Mass spectrometry measurements were performed using a LTQ OrbiTrap XL mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher) coupled to a NanoLC-AS1 (Eksigent) using electrospray ionization. For LC separation a capillary column packed with 8 cm C18 beads with a diameter of 3 μm and a pore size of 100 Å was used. Peptides were loaded on the column with a flow rate of 500 nl/min for 16 min and eluted by an increasing acetonitrile gradient from 3% acetonitrile to 50% acetonitrile for 60 min with a flow rate of 200 nl/min. One scan cycle was comprised of a survey full MS scan of spectra from m/z 300 to m/z 2000 acquired in the FT-Orbitrap with a resolution of R = 60,000 at m/z 400, followed by MS/MS scans of the five highest parent ions. CID was done with a target value of 1e4 in the linear trap. Collision energy was set to 28 V, Q value to 0.25, and activation time to 30 ms. Dynamic exclusion was enabled at a duration of 120 s.
Interpretation of MS/MS spectra
The acquired raw spectra were transformed to mgf data format and searched against the TAIR10 database (28, download on January 17th, 2011) (Lamesch et al.,) with concatenated decoy database and supplemented with common contaminants (71,032 entries) using the Mascot algorithm (version 2.3.02) (Mascot Science). The search parameters used were: mass = monoisotopic, requirement for tryptic ends, 2 missed cleavages allowed, precursor ion tolerance = ±10 ppm, fragment ion tolerance = ±0.8 Da, variable modifications of methionine (M, PSI-MOD name: oxidation, mono Δ = 15.995) and static modifications of cysteine (C, PSI-MOD name: iodoacetamide derivatized residue, mono Δ = 57.0215). The diglycine tag that remains attached to ubiquitylated peptides after tryptic digest was not included as variable modification because we had previously observed that the identification of peptide ubiquitylation sites in complex peptide mixtures in which only a small portion of the peptides carry the diglycine tag will result in unreliable identifications (Svozil et al.,). Peptide spectrum assignments with ionscore >30 and expect value <0.015, except those of known contaminants, were filtered for ambiguity. Peptides matching to several proteins were excluded from further analyses. This does not apply to different splice variants of the same protein or to different loci sharing exactly the same amino acid sequence. All remaining spectrum assignments were inserted into the pep2pro database (Baerenfaller et al.,; Hirsch-Hoffmann et al.,). The false discovery rate (FDR) was calculated by dividing the number of reverse hits by the number of true hits times 100%. It was 0.55% for the tissue-type specific extracts and 1.6% for the affinity enrichments. The mass spectrometry proteomics data have been deposited to the ProteomeXchange Consortium (http://www.proteomexchange.org) via the PRIDE partner repository (Vizcaíno et al.,) with the dataset identifiers PXD000941 and PXD000942. The data are also available in the pep2pro database at www.pep2pro.ethz.ch.
Statistical analyses and selection criteria
Proteins were quantified by normalized spectral counting according to Svozil et al. by calculating the expected contribution of each individual protein to the samples total peptide pool correcting the values using a normalization factor that balances for the theoretical number of tryptic peptides per protein and sample depth. The statistical analyses and selection criteria were applied to each tissue type-specific dataset separately. For the total protein extracts, proteins with a minimum of 5 spectra within a tissue type were included in the quantification. After filtering, the normalized spectral counts for the proteins in each tissue type were re-normalized by scaling the average to a value of 1. Proteins were considered changing in abundance between SylA and mock treatment if the fold-change of the average relative abundance over three biological replicates was more than 1.5 and the corresponding p-value in a paired t-test was smaller than 0.05, or if the fold change was an outlier. As outliers we considered fold changes that were higher than the upper adjacent values in boxplot statistics, which correspond to the values of the largest observation that is less than or equal to the upper quartile plus 1.5 times the length of the interquartile range. The upper adjacent values were: 2.94 for the mesophyll, 2.55 for the vasculature and 6.05 for the epidermis. Those proteins, which were identified in at least two of the three biological replicates in one treatment and not at all in the other treatment were also considered as changing in abundance. Proteins considered to be exclusively identified in a specific tissue type were detected with a minimum of 5 spectra in the respective tissue type, but not at all in the other two tissue types. In the affinity enrichment experiments we required a minimum of 5 different spectra to call a protein identified. With these data an index was calculated, where each protein identification in the UBA-domain affinity enrichment counts +1 and each identification in the sepharose control counts -1 toward the final index. As an example, an index of 2 either indicates that the protein was identified in two of the three UBA affinity enrichment replicates and never in the sepharose control, or that it was identified in all three UBA affinity enrichment replicates and only once in the sepharose control. For accepting a protein to be ubiquitylated we required that the protein had a minimum index of 2 and was either not detected at all in the sepharose background control or was at least 5-fold enriched. Analyses were done using the R algorithm (R Core Team,) (Supplemental Data Sheet 1).
GO categorization
GO categorization was performed as described before (Svozil et al.,) using the Ontologizer software (http://compbio.charite.de/ontologizer) (Bauer et al.,) in combination with the Arabidopsis annotation file considering aspect Biological Process. Annotations with GO evidence codes IEA (Inferred from Electronic Annotation) or RCA (Inferred from Reviewed Computational Analysis) were excluded from analyses. As background lists the organ-specific protein maps for leaves of the pep2pro TAIR10 wos dataset were used (Baerenfaller et al.,). Over-representation was assessed with the Topology-weighted method and the p-values were corrected for multiple testing using the Bonferroni method. GO categories with a p < 0.01 were considered significant.