ABSTRACT:
Cell surface proteins are major targets of biomedical research due to their utility as cellular markers and their extracellular accessibility for pharmacological intervention. However, information about the cell surface protein repertoire (the surfaceome) of individual cells is only sparsely available. Here, we applied the Cell Surface Capture (CSC) technology to 41 human and 31 mouse cell types to generate a mass-spectrometry derived Cell Surface Protein Atlas (CSPA) providing cellular surfaceome snapshots at high resolution. The CSPA is presented in form of an easy-to-navigate interactive database, a downloadable data matrix and with tools for targeted surfaceome rediscovery (http://wlab.ethz.ch/cspa). The cellular surfaceome snapshots of different cell types, including cancer cells, resulted in a combined dataset of 1492 human and 1296 mouse cell surface glycoproteins, providing experimental evidence for their cell surface expression on different cell types, including 136 G-protein coupled receptors and 75 membrane receptor tyrosine-protein kinases. Integrated analysis of the CSPA reveals that the concerted biological function of individual cell types is mainly guided by quantitative rather than qualitative surfaceome differences. The CSPA will be useful for the evaluation of drug targets, for the improved classification of cell types and for a better understanding of the surfaceome and its concerted biological functions in complex signaling microenvironments.
METHODS:
Material and Methods
Cell culture
Cell lines were cultured according to guidelines from the American Type Culture Collection (ATCC) or from published cell culture conditions. The cell types were annotated and classified through information provided by ATCC or the academic laboratory that provided the cells. ATCC catalog numbers and literature references for each cell type are listed in S1 Table. Generally, soluble cells were grown to a density of 0.1 to 1 million cells per ml and adherent cells were passaged at 80% confluence. For each CSC experiment, either 1 x 108 soluble cells were harvested, or 5 x 15 cm dishes with adherent cells at 80% confluence. Tissues were harvested with minimal disturbance of cellular integrity and dissociated mechanically or when necessary with protease mixtures (collagenase, dispase); 200 mg to 1 g tissue was used per CSC experiment.
Tissues and animal cells
Human and mouse adipocytes were kindly provided by Prof. Christian Wolfrum (Schwerzenbach, Switzerland) and the use thereof approved as stated in. Astroglial cells were kindly provided by Prof. Dr. Burkhardt Becher (Zurich, Switzerland) and the use thereof approved as stated in. B-ALL cells were kindly provided by Prof. Dr. med. Jean-Pierre Bourquin (Zurich, Switzerland) and the use thereof was approved as stated in. The brain tumor sample and the primary glioblastoma cells, which were expanded ex vivo, were kindly provided by Prof. Dr. med. Karl Frei (Zurich, Switzerland) and the use thereof was in accordance with the Declaration of Helsinki and approved by the ethics committee of the Canton Zurich.
The lymphoma sample were kindly provided by PD Dr. med. Marianne Tinguely (Zurich, Switzerland) in accordance with the Helsinki declaration and Swiss laws and was approved by the official authorities of the ethical committee of the Canton Zurich (StV2-2007). The melanoma cells and the neural stem cells from the forebrain were kindly provided by Prof. Dr. Lukas Sommer (Zurich, Switzerland) and the use thereof was in accordance with the Swiss federal and cantonal laws on animal protection and approved by the ethics committee of canton Zurich. Neural stem cells of the spinal cord and the subventricular zone was kindly provided by Dr. Michaela Thallmair (Zurich, Switzerland) and the use thereof approved as stated in. The study of natural killer cells was approved as stated in. The study of spleenocytes was approved as stated in. The T-cell subsets TH-0, TH-1 and TH-17 were kindly provided by Prof. Dr. Manfred Kopf (Zurich, Switzerland) and the use thereof was in accordance with Swiss federal legislation and has been approved by the local overseeing body Gesundheitsdirektion Kanton Zürich, Veterinaeramt (permission 148/2005).
Cell Surface Capture
For each CSC experiment, either 1x108 suspension cells, 5 x 15cm dished with adherent cells at 80% confluence or 200 mg to 1 g of tissue were used. CSC was performed as described previously. In detail, cells were treated for 15 min at 4°C in the dark with 2 mM sodium meta-periodate (Pierce) in PBS, pH 6.5 and were then incubated with 6.5 mM biocytin hydrazide (Biotium) in PBS, pH 6.5 for 60 min. Homogenization was done in hypotonic lysis buffer (10 mM Tris, pH 7.5, 0.5 mM MgCl2, and 10 mM iodoacetamide) using a Dounce homogenizer. Cell debris and nuclei were removed by centrifugation at 1,700 g for 10 min and the supernatant was centrifuged again in an ultracentrifuge at ~150,000 g for 1 h. The solubilized membrane pellet was reduced (5 mM TCEP, 30 min), alkylated (10 mM iodoacetamide, 30 min) and digested overnight with trypsin. Trypsin was inactivated for 10min at 95°C and biotinylated glycopeptides were bound to Streptavidin Plus UltraLink Resin (SA beads; Pierce). After extensive washing, N-linked glycopeptides were enzymatically released from the SA beads overnight by PNGase F (New England Biolabs). Peptides were desalted on Ultra MicroTIP Columns (The Nest Group) according to the manufacturer’s instructions and dried in a SpeedVac concentrator. Finally, peptides were solubilized in LC-MS grade water containing 0.1% formic acid and 5% acetonitrile.
For the following cell lines: B-ALL, HBL-1, HDLM-2, HL-60, KM-H2, L428, L540, MedB-1, NB4, SU4, SUDHL-6, U2932 (all human) and TH0, TH1, TH17 (all mouse) a slightly adapted CSC protocol was applied in which proteins were not reduced and alkylated before digestion. Instead, after enriching for N-linked glycopeptides, peptides bound via di-sulfide bridges to N-linked glycopeptides were released by reduction in a first elution step. N-linked glycopeptides were thereafter released by PNGase F. For the CSPA, only results from the N-glycopeptide fraction were included.
Reverse-phase chromatography and mass spectrometry
Peptide samples were analyzed either on a Tempo Nano 1D+ HPLC system (Applied Biosystems/MDS Sciex) connected to a 7 tesla Finnigan LTQ-FT-ICR instrument (Thermo Scientific) or on an Eksigent Nano LC System (Eksigent Technologies) connected to a hybrid LTQ Orbitrap XL (Thermo Scientific). Both systems were equipped with a nanoelectrospray ion source (Thermo Scientific). In total, 385 LC-MS/MS runs were performed. In the following, generic methods for the LTQ-FT and LTQ Orbitrap XL are described. Some samples were analyzed with slightly different settings.
On the LTQ-FT-ICR system, peptides were separated on a RP-HPLC column (75 μm x 15 cm) packed in-house with C18 resin (Magic C18 AQ 3 μm, 200 Å; Michrom BioResources) using a linear gradient from 96% solvent A (0.15% formic acid) and 4% solvent B (98% acetonitrile, 2% water, 0.15% formic acid) to 35% solvent B over 60 or 90 minutes at a flow rate of 0.3 μl/min. Each MS1 scan (acquired in the ICR cell) was followed by collision-induced dissociation (CID, acquired in the LTQ) of the five most abundant precursor ions with dynamic exclusion for 30 seconds. Only MS1 signals exceeding 150 counts were allowed to trigger MS2 scans with wideband activation disabled. Total cycle time was approximately 1 to 1.5 s. For MS1 scans, 3x106 ions were accumulated in the ICR cell over a maximum time of 500 ms and scanned at a resolution of 100,000 FWHM (at 400 m/z). MS2 spectra were acquired using the normal scan mode, a target setting of 104 ions, and an accumulation time of 100 ms. The normalized collision energy was set to 32%, and one microscan was acquired for each spectrum.
On the LTQ Orbitrap XL system, chromatographic separation of peptides was carried out on a RP-HPLC column (75 μm x 10.5 cm) packed in-house with C18 resin (Magic C18 AQ 3 μm, 200 Å; Michrom BioResources) using a linear gradient from 95% solvent A (0.15% formic acid) and 5% solvent B to 35% solvent B (98% acetonitrile, 2% water, 0.1% formic acid) over 60 min at a flow rate of 0.3 μl/min. The data acquisition mode was set to acquire one high-resolution MS scan in the Orbitrap followed by five CID MS/MS scans in the linear ion trap. One microscan was acquired per MS/MS scan. For a high-resolution MS scan, 2 x 106 ions were accumulated over a maximum time of 400 ms and the FWHW resolution was set to 60,000 (at m/z 300). Only MS signals exceeding 250 ion counts triggered a MS/MS attempt, followed by dynamic exclusion for 30 seconds, and 104 ions were acquired for a MS/MS scan over a maximum time of 200 ms. The normalized collision energy was set to 35%. Singly charged ions and ions with unassigned charge states were excluded from triggering MS/MS scans in both systems.
Database searching
Proteins were identified by searching MS and MS/MS data of peptides with the SEQUEST search engine against the UniProt/SwissProt Protein Knowledgebase (version 57.15 of either Homo sapiens or Mus musculus taxonomy) concatenated to the reversed sequences of all proteins and common contaminants (40521 entries human, 32455 entries mouse), with a precursor mass tolerance of 0.2 Dalton. Other search parameters were at least one tryptic terminus, two maximal internal cleavage sites, carbamidomethylation of cysteines as fixed modification (add 57.021464 Da), deamidation of asparagines (add 0.984016 Da) and oxidation of methionines (add 15.9949 Da) as variable modifications. Probability scoring was performed by PeptideProphet and ProteinProphet within the Trans-Proteomic Pipeline TPP v4.3.1. The ProteinProphet probability score was set individually for each cell type to a false discovery rate (FDR) of 1%.
The MS-based proteomics data have been deposited to the ProteomeXchange Consortium (http://proteomecentral.proteomexchange.org) via the PRIDE partner repository with the dataset identifier PXD000589.
Spectral library generation and searching
Spectral libraries were built and searched with SpectraST 4.0. Peptides with a higher peptide probability than 0.9 were extracted and used to create consensus spectra. Consensus spectra were filtered with the SpectraST quality filter level 2. All asparagines in the motif N-X-[ST] (wherein N stands for asparagine) were set as deamidated and all other asparagines were set as unmodified. An equal number of decoy spectra were appended to the spectral libraries. The original mzXML files were searched against the created spectral libraries with SpectraST with carbamidomethylation as a fixed modification. Probability scoring was performed by PeptideProphet and ProteinProphet using the non-parametric model based on decoy-estimated FDR. The probability cutoff was set individually for each cell type to reach an estimated FDR of 1%.
CSPA assembly
For all cell types in the CSPA, at least two technical replicates (replicate LC-MS/MS analyses of the sample sample) were acquired. All samples in the CSPA were required to display specificity for N-glycopeptides of over 50%. The average specificity for N-glycopeptides was over 75%. A maximum of three independent CSC experiments per cell type and three LC-MS/MS runs per experiment were integrated in the CSPA. The identified proteins were filtered for the presence of at least one peptide with a deamidated asparagine (N[115]), measured with at least two independent scan events. We also included peptides with deamidated asparagines outside the N-glycosylation motif for two reasons: First, depending on the fragment ions identified, SEQUEST has problems assigning the modification to the correct amino acid when more than one asparagine is present in the peptide sequence. Second, N-linked glycosylation outside the consensus motif has recently been shown to occur in rare cases. Search results from the classical database search and the spectral search were combined to create a non-redundant surfaceome list; members were classified based on UniProt predicted subcellular locations.
SISYPHUS-CSPA
SISYPHUS is a Filemaker based MAC/PC compatible database, developed in-house (http://wlab.ethz.ch/cspa/). It processes output files from the trans-proteomic pipeline, assigns biologically relevant context information derived from various online databases (e.g., UniProt, Gene Ontology), and presents the data in a user-friendly, browsable format. We provide SISYPHUS populated with the datasets from the spectral searches.
Label-free quantification and further processing
Peptide precursor intensities were extracted by the label-free option of the XPressPeptideParser, which is an integral part of the TPP. Resulting raw intensities were logarithmized and quantile normalized per LC-MS/MS run. Proteins were quantified by MSstats, which applies fixed ANOVA models for each individual protein. No imputation was performed. For proteins only detected in one cell type, the average abundance of all detected features was calculated.
Transmembrane domains were predicted by Phobius, version 1.01. Gene ontology enrichment was obtained from the PANTHER webserver. Further processing and visualization of the data was performed in R, TIBCO Spotfire Professional 3.1.0 (TIBCO Software Inc.), Protter or by Perl scripts and an in-house database software.
Selected reaction monitoring
CSC samples from Jurkat cells were produced as described above, except that 100 μg of biotinylated transferrin was spiked into the solubilized microsomal pellet. Holo-transferrin (200 μg, 98% purity, Sigma Aldrich) was biotinylated in a 20-min oxidation with 10 mM sodium meta-periodate (Pierce) in PBS, pH 6.5, cleaned over a C18 column (Sep-Pack Vac C18 cartridge 100 mg, Waters), followed by a 1.5 hour incubation with 500 μg biocytin hydrazide (Biotium) and cleaned again with a C18 column. Transferrin was monitored by SRM together with four cell surface proteins (CD147, CD100, CD54, EPHB2) in order to determine protein loss during the procedure. Table D in S6 File contains the measured peptides with the respective transitions. SRM measurements were done on a 6460 Triple Quadrupole instrument (Agilent Technologies) equipped with an HPLC-Chip cube and connected to an Agilent 1200 series nano-LC system. Peptide samples were loaded first to the 160-nl C18 enrichment column embedded in the HPLC chip (large capacity chip, 150 mm 300 Å C18 with 160 nl trap column, Agilent Technologies) and subsequently separated chromatographically over a 60 min gradient from 97% solvent A (0.2% formic acid) to 35% solvent B (97% acetonitrile, 0.2% formic acid) with a flow rate of 0.3 μl/min. Collision energy was calculated by the formula (([precursor mass/charge] * 3.6)/100–4.8), and fragmenter voltage was set to 130 V. The transitions were measured with a dwell time of 20 ms and a MS1 and MS2 resolution of 0.7 FWHW. Further processing of the raw SRM data was performed in Skyline v0.6.
Flow cytometry
CD54 levels on Jurkat cells were analyzed by direct immunofluorescence. Briefly, 1 x 106 cells were washed with PBS, 0.1% fetal bovine serum (FBS) and then incubated for 30 min at 4°C with anti-CD54-PE (BD Biosciences) in a 1:50 dilution. Cells were washed again with PBS, 0.1% FBS and analyzed on a FACSCalibur System (BD Biosciences). Ten thousand events were measured per analysis and subsequently exported to FlowJo7 (Tree Star). QuantiBRITE reference beads (BD Biosciences) were resuspended in 500 μl PBS, 0.1% FBS and measured on a FACSCalibur System (BD Biosciences).