ABSTRACT:
HLA-DR-molecules are highly expressed in synovial tissue (ST), the target of the immune response in chronic inflammatory forms of arthritis. Here, we used LC-MS/MS to identify HLA-DR-presented self-peptides in cells taken directly from clinical samples: ST, synovial fluid mononuclear cells (SFMC), or peripheral blood mononuclear cells (PBMC) from five patients with rheumatoid arthritis (RA) and eight with Lyme arthritis (LA). We identified 1,593 non-redundant HLA-DR-presented peptides, derived from 870 source proteins. Sixty-seven percent of the peptides identified in SFMC and 55% of those found in PBMC were found in ST, but analysis of SFMC/PBMC also revealed new antigen-presented peptides. Peptides were synthesized and examined for reactivity with the patients’ PBMC. To date, three autoantigens in RA and four novel autoantigens in LA, presented in ST and/or PBMC, were shown to be targets of T- and B-cell responses in these diseases; ongoing analyses may add to this list. Thus, immunoprecipitation and LC-MS/MS can now identify hundreds of HLA-DR-presented self-peptides from individual patients’ tissues or fluids with mixed cell populations. Importantly, identification of HLA-DR-presented peptides from SFMC or PBMC allows testing of more patients, including those early in the disease. Direct analysis of clinical samples facilitates identification of novel immunogenic T-cell epitopes. Data are available via ProteomeXchange (identifier PXD003051).
for TOC only
METHODS:
EXPERIMENTAL PROCEDURES
Study Patients
The study was approved by the Human Investigations Committee at Massachusetts General Hospital, and all participants gave written informed consent. The five RA patients met the 2010 criteria of the American College of Rheumatology/ European League against Rheumatism (ACR/EULAR) definition for the diagnosis of rheumatoid arthritis, and the eight LA patients met the criteria of the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention for the diagnosis of Lyme disease. All eight LA patients had antibiotic-refractory LA, defined as persistent arthritis for ≥ three months after the start of ≥ two months of appropriate oral antibiotic therapy and ≥ one month of IV antibiotic therapy. In LA patients, synovial tissue was obtained at the time of therapeutic, arthroscopic synovectomies, and, in RA patients, the tissue was collected at the time of synovectomy or joint replacement surgery. Sufficient quantities of SFMC were available for analysis in six patients and PBMC were available in four patients.
ST, SFMC, and PBMC Preparation
All the reagents were purchased from Sigma-Aldrich (St. Louis, MO) except where noted. ST samples (8–17 g) were prepared using the protocol described previously. Heparinized SFMC and PBMC (~3 to 8.7 × 107 cells) were obtained by Ficoll-Hypaque separation (MP Biomedicals) and stored in liquid nitrogen prior to analysis. On the day of purification, SFMC and PBMC samples were quickly thawed by placement in a 37 °C water bath for two minutes. Cells were washed twice in phosphate buffered saline (PBS) (Life Technologies) by centrifuging at 800 × g for 10 min. The pellet was re-suspended with 10 mL lysis buffer: 150 mM sodium chloride, 20 mM tris(hydroxymethyl)aminomethane•HCl (pH 8.0), 5 mM ethylenediaminetetraacetic acid disodium solution, 0.04% sodium azide, 1 mM 4-(2-aminoethyl)benzenesulfonyl fluoride•HCl, 10 µg/mL leupeptin, 10 µg/mL pepstatin A, 5 µg/mL aprotinin, and 1% 3-[(3-cholamidopropyl)dimethylammonio]-1-propanesulfonate. Immunoaffinity purifications of HLA-DR complexes from SFMC and PBMC were performed using the protocol previously described for synovial tissue samples. HLA-DR protein and the bound peptide complexes were eluted from L243-conjugated beads into seven fractions using 0.7 mL of 0.5% formic acid (FA) in each fraction. HLA-DR protein and the bound peptides were separated using Microcon 10,000-Da molecular weight cutoff filters (Millipore, Billerica, MA). The peptide fractions were dried under vacuum, followed by desalting using C18 ZipTip (Millipore, Billerica, MA). The eluates from the seven desalted peptide fractions were combined, dried under vacuum, and reconstituted with 20 µL of 0.1% FA. For each LC-MS/MS run, 1 µL of this solution was used for synovial tissue samples, and 2 µL was used for SFMC or PBMC samples, without regard to which LC-MS/MS system was employed for the analysis.
LC-MS/MS
The methods used for each mass spectrometer are given below.
LTQ-Orbitrap XL mass spectrometer
A nanoAcquity UPLC system (Waters Corp., Milford, MA) was coupled to an LTQ-Orbitrap XL MS (Thermo Fisher Scientific, San Jose, CA) through a TriVersa NanoMate ion source (Advion, Ithaca, NY). Peptide enrichment was performed with a trapping column (180 µm × 20 mm, 5 µm 100 Å Symmetry C18, Waters Corp) at a flow rate of 15 µL/min for 1 min, and separation was achieved with a capillary column (150 µm × 10 cm, 1.7 µm 130 Å BEH C18, Waters Corp). Buffer A contained 1% acetonitrile (ACN) and 0.1% formic acid in water, and buffer B contained 1% water and 0.1% formic acid in ACN. A linear gradient of buffer B from 2% to 40% over 52 min was used at a flow rate of 0.5 µL/min. The capillary voltage was set to 1.7 kV using the NanoMate, and the capillary temperature was set to 120 °C. The mass spectra were recorded over the range m/z 300–2000 at a resolution of 60,000 (the width of the peak at half its maximum height at m/z 300) at a scan rate of approximately 1.2 s/spectrum. Tandem MS was performed for the five most abundant, multiply-charged species in the mass spectra that had a signal intensity threshold of 8000 NL. The normalized collision energy for CID was set to 35%, and helium was used as the collision gas. MS/MS spectra were recorded with the LTQ XL linear ion trap. All spectra were recorded in profile mode. Two to five LC-MS/MS runs were performed for each sample, and all the RAW files for each sample were combined into one Mascot generic file using Proteome Discoverer 1.3 software (Thermo Fisher Scientific).
Q Exactive plus mass spectrometer
A nanoAcquity UPLC system was coupled to a Q Exactive plus MS (Thermo Fisher Scientific, San Jose, CA) through a TriVersa NanoMate ion source. The same peptide enrichment and separation columns, HPLC solvents and gradients, and NanoMate capillary voltage and temperature used on the LTQ-Orbitrap XL MS were applied on the Q Exactive plus MS. Survey MS scans were recorded over the range m/z 400–2000 with a resolution of 70,000 (at m/z 300). The 15 most abundant, multiply-charged ions were selected for higher-energy collisional induced dissociation (HCD) MS/MS with a resolution of 17,500, an isolation width of 1.5 m/z, and a normalized collision energy of 27%. All spectra were recorded in profile mode. One LC-MS/MS run was performed for each sample, and the RAW file for each sample was converted to a Mascot generic file using Proteome Discoverer 1.3 software (Thermo Fisher Scientific).
6550 iFunnel QTOF LC/MS
Two 1260 HPLC systems were coupled to a 6550 iFunnel QTOF MS through a chip cube interface (Agilent Technologies, Santa Clara, CA). A Polaris-HR-3C18 chip was used for peptide enrichment and separation. The flow rate on the enrichment column was set at 2 µL/min with sample flush volume set as 4 µL. With the same solvents used on the Waters UPLC systems, a gradient of buffer B (from 2% to 5% over 0.1 min, 5% to 20% over 74.9 min, 20% to 40% over 10 min, 40% to 90% over 10 min, held at 90% buffer B for 5 min, returned to 2% buffer B and held for 10 min) was used at a flow rate of 0.3 µL/min for peptide separation. The capillary voltage was set to 1.7 to 1.95 kV, and the gas temperature was set to 225 °C. The survey mass spectra were recorded over the range m/z 295–1700 with acquisition rate of 8 spectra/second. Tandem mass spectra were recorded over the range m/z 50–1700 with an acquisition rate of 3 spectra/second. Precursor ion isolation was performed with a narrow isolation window of 1.3 m/z. Tandem MS was performed for the 20 most abundant, multiply-charged species in the mass spectra that had a signal intensity threshold of 5000 counts or a relative threshold of 0.001%. The collision energy for CID was set using the formula [3.1×(m/z)/100+1] for doubly charged precursor ions and [3.6×(m/z)/100-4.8] for triply and higher charged precursor ions. Active exclusion was enabled after recording one tandem spectrum and released after 0.15 min. All spectra were recorded in the centroid mode. One to two LC-MS/MS runs were performed for each sample, and all the data files for each sample were combined into one Mascot generic file using MassHunter Qualitative Analysis B.05.00 (Agilent Technologies, Santa Clara, CA).
Protein Database Searching
In our original study, the International Protein Index (IPI) database (72,155 protein sequences) was used to identify HLA-DR-presented peptides from ST samples from two patients each with RA or LA (identified here as patients RA1, RA2, LA1 and LA2). Because the IPI database is now closed and no longer maintained, the spectra obtained for the samples from these four patients were reanalyzed using the UniProt protein database (95,500 entries, August 2010) and the findings were compared to our original study. Using the UniProt database, ~96–98% of the peptides identified were the same as those previously assigned using the IPI database. Since an SFMC sample from LA2, and SFMC and PBMC samples from RA2 were available for analysis in this study, the re-analyzed LC-MS/MS data from ST of RA1, RA2, LA1, and LA2 were included here for comparison of the HLA-DR-presented peptides repertoires in ST, SFMC, and PBMC. In the current study, HLA-DR-presented self-peptides were identified by searching the Mascot generic file from each sample against the UniProt human database (including both Swiss-Prot and TrEMBL databases, 95,500 entries, August 2010) concatenated with a decoy database. The decoy databases were generated by randomizing each protein sequence in the database using the Perl script decoy.pl (Matrix Science). The same protein database containing the decoy database was used by all three protein database search engines, Mascot 2.4.0 (Matrix Science), OMSSA Browser 2.1.1 (NCBI), and X!Tandem tandem-win-12-10-01-1 (The Global Proteome Machine Organization www.thegpm.org). For inclusion of a peptide sequence in our database, a consensus match was required (assignment of the sequence by >two search engines) or a match by only one program that was judged acceptable upon review by two experts. Cysteinylation of cysteine, deamidation of glutamine and asparagine, pyroglutamic acid from amino-terminal glutamine and glutamic acid, and oxidation of methionine were specified as the variable modifications in all searches. S-cysteinylated peptides have been identified in MHC class I- and class II-presented peptides and in our previous study. In addition, the conversion of arginine to citrulline was included as a variable post-translational modification; peaks exhibiting the difference in molecular weight corresponding to arginine vs. citrulline (Δ = 0.98402 Da) were searched for each arginine residue in the database.
For data acquired using the LTQ-Orbitrap XL MS, precursor ion error tolerance was set as 0.01 Da and fragment ion error tolerance was set as 0.5 Da; for data acquired using the Q Exactive plus MS, precursor ion error tolerance was set as 10 ppm and fragment ion error tolerance was set as 20 mmu; for data acquired using 6550 iFunnel QTOF MS, precursor ion error tolerance was set as 20 ppm and fragment ion error tolerance was set as 50 mmu. “No enzyme” was specified for all the protein database searches. In this study, we applied scores or E-values as threshold to filter the peptide identification results from three search engines: Mascot score≥20; OMSSA e-value≤0.01; and X!Tandem e-value≤10. These thresholds were set at a lower stringency level to allow more candidate peptides into the second filter which was a: consensus matches by at least two search engines, accomplished by a Microsoft Access query. With the application of the two-level filter, we were able to obtain a sufficient list of HLA-DR-presented peptides with higher quality (shown by the low levels of decoy hits) for immunogenicity tests with limited amounts of patients’ cells.
Over the course of the study, UniProt human protein database was continuously updated. To validate the results obtained with the UniProt database presented herein, the spectra obtained from a recent PBMC sample from an RA patient were reanalyzed using a UniProt human database (Swiss-Prot database, 20,100 entries, January 2016) and 93% of the peptides identified with the updated database were the same as those assigned using the UniProt database used here.
Removal of redundant peptide sequences
The endogenous HLA-DR-presented peptides derived from the same source protein often contain overlapping sequences with different peptide lengths. For example, 116DHLKYVMLPVA126, 116DHLKYVMLPVAD127, and 116DHLKYVMLPVADQ128 from HP protein (accession Q6PEJ8) were all identified from ST of LA8, and 116DHLKYVMLPVA126 and 116DHLKYVMLPVAD127 were considered redundant peptides of 116DHLKYVMLPVADQ128. To address this issue, the lists of identified consensus peptides were submitted to software generated in-house that collates and sets aside redundant peptides that have amino acid sequences that overlap in a core sequence. Peptide sequences with at least six continuous overlapping amino acid residues were considered redundant, and the peptide with the longest amino acid sequence was output from the software program. This software was also used to compare the consensus peptides among different samples. Peptide sequences with at least six continuous overlapping amino acid residues were considered consensus.
Identification of all source proteins containing a specific peptide sequence
All of the consensus peptides identified by at least two protein database search engines, and peptides assigned by a single program whose identifications passed close manual inspection, were submitted to another software program generated in-house, that screens the peptide sequences against the UniProt human protein database (not including decoy sequences). All the accession numbers of the source proteins containing the screened peptide sequence are displayed as a text string concatenating the accession numbers by semicolons in Microsoft Excel. This search showed that a number of identified peptides could be derived from more than one source protein, the consensus source proteins among different samples were correlated by matching the text strings containing protein accession numbers using a Microsoft Access query. The mass spectrometry proteomics data have been deposited to the ProteomeXchange Consortium via the PRIDE partner repository with the dataset identifier PXD003051.
Determinations of immunogenicity of peptides and source proteins
For the translational component of the protocol, the non-redundant peptides identified by LC-MS/MS were synthesized and evaluated with the matching patient’s PBMC using ELISpot assays. Immunogenic peptides were then tested for T cell reactivity by ELISpot assay, and the source proteins of the peptides were assayed for B cell responses by ELISA in many patients and control subjects. To date, the determinations of peptide immunogenicity have been completed for three RA and in five LA patients. Further such analyses are ongoing.
Statistics
All p values are two-tailed. A p value of ≤0.05 was considered statistically significant.