ABSTRACT:
Amyloidosis is a disease characterized by the formation of extracellular amyloid deposits. Immunoglobulin light-chain amyloidosis can appear as a local disorder presenting with mild symptoms or as a life threatening systemic disease. The systemic form of immunoglobulin light-chain amyloidosis is the most common type of amyloidosis in western countries although it is a rare disease. Identification of the proteins forming amyloid fibrils is essential for the diagnosis of the disease and knowledge about the overall protein composition of the deposits may lead to a larger understanding of the deposition events thereby facilitating a more detailed picture of the molecular pathology.
In this pilot study, we investigated the protein composition of amyloid deposits isolated from human specimens of the eyelid, conjunctiva, and orbit. Deposits and internal control tissue (patient tissue without apparent deposits) were procured by laser capture microdissection. Proteins in the captured amyloid and control samples were quantified by liquid chromatography tandem mass spectrometry using the label-free exponential modified Protein Abundance Index (emPAI) method.
Immunoglobulin light chain kappa or lambda was found to be the most predominant protein in the amyloid deposits from the eyelid, conjunctiva, and orbit. Five proteins, apolipoprotein A-I, carboxypeptidase B2 (TAFI), complement component C9, fibulin-1 and plasminogen were found solely across all amyloid but not in the control tissue. In addition, the protein profiles identified apolipoprotein E and serum amyloid P component to be associated with the immunoglobulin light chain deposits across all three tissues analyzed. The method used in this study provided high sensitivity and specificity for the type of amyloid and may provide additional information on the pathology of the amyloid deposits in the ocular tissues studied.
METHODS:
Materials and methods
Specimens
Examples of eyelid amyloidosis were obtained from three patients (two females and one male). One specimen of orbital amyloidosis and one case of conjunctival amyloidosis were also available for analysis. Both of the later specimens were from patients of the female gender. The affected tissue of all cases was characterized by a slowly enlarging swelling that was excised surgically. Tissue was acquired with the approval of the Institutional Review Board of Duke University Medical Center, according to the Declaration of Helsinki.
Laser capture microdissection
Procuring of amyloid deposits was performed as previously described. Shortly, 8 µm thick tissue sections of formaldehyde fixed and paraffin embedded tissue were cut and placed centrally on non-charged glass slides, followed by deparaffinization, staining with Congo red, and dehydration using standard histological procedures. The Arcturus Autopix Laser Capture Microscope (Applied Biosystem) was used to isolate amyloid deposits appearing red due to the Congo red staining (Figure 1). In addition, tissue with no apparent amyloid deposits was likewise procured and used as control tissue. Tissue was collected on CapSure Macro LCM Caps (Applied Biosystem), subsequently placed in sterile 0.5 ml Eppendorf Biopur Microcentrifuge Tubes (VWR) and stored at −80°C until further processed.
Sample preparation
Proteins from the laser capture microdissected samples of amyloid from the eyelid, conjunctiva and orbit were extracted using a modified protocol of the Liquid Tissue MS Protein Prep Kit (Expression Pathology Inc., Gaithersburg, MD). LCM films containing captured protein deposits and control tissue samples were stripped from the caps and incubated with 40 µl extraction buffer (10 mM Tris, pH 7.8, 0.1 % RapiGest (Waters)) at 95 °C for 90 min. Samples were centrifuged at 10.000 × g for 1 min and subsequently cooled on ice. Extracted proteins were incubated with 5 µg porcine trypsin (Sigma) at 37 °C for 16 hours, vortexing every 20 min for the first hour. Samples were then centrifuged at 10.000 × g for 5 min, supernatant isolated and incubated with 10 mM DTT at 95 °C for 5 min followed by incubation with 30 mM iodoacetamide for 15 min in the dark. Peptides generated from each digest were acidified with 5 µl of 5% formic acid and recovered using Stage-tips (Proxeon, Thermo Scientific). The peptides were eluted with 10 µl 70 % acetonitrile, and subsequently lyophilized before being dissolved in 12 µl 0.1 % formic acid.
Liquid chromatography tandem mass spectrometry analyses
For each sample two technical replicates were run. The samples were analyzed by LC-MS/MS using nanoflow liquid chromatography on an Easy-nLC system (Thermo Scientific) coupled directly to a TripleTOF 5600+ mass spectrometer (AB Sciex). Samples were loaded on a 0.1×21 mm C18 trap column and a 0.075×150 mm C18 analytical column (NanoSeparations). Peptides were eluted and directly electrosprayed into the mass spectrometer using a 60 min gradient from 5–40% acetonitrile in 0.1% formic acid at a flow rate of 250 nl/min. Data was acquired using an ion spray voltage of 2.5 kV, curtain gas of 30, and an interface heater temperature of 150 °C. For IDA, survey scans were acquired in 250 ms, and as many as 50 product ion scans were collected if exceeding a threshold of 125 counts per second (counts/s) and with a +2 to +5 charge-state. A sweeping collision energy setting of 40 ± 15 eV was applied to all precursor ions for collision-induced dissociation. Dynamic exclusion was set for ½ of peak width (~6 s), and then the precursor was refreshed off of the exclusion list.
Identification and rough relative quantification of proteins
The mass spectrometry data was converted to Mascot generic format (MGF) using the AB SCIEX MS Data Converter beta 1.3 (AB SCIEX) and the "proteinpilot MGF" parameters and used to interrogate the Swiss-Prot (version 2014_02) Homo sapiens (20,264 sequences) database using an in-house Mascot search engine (Matrix Science, London, England version 2.3.02) with a peptide tolerance of +/− 10 ppm, MS/MS tolerance of 0.2 Da, carbamidomethylation of cysteine residues as a fixed modification, methionine oxidation and proline hydroxylation as variable modifications, semiTrypsin as enzyme, 1 missed cleavage was allowed and ESI-QUAD-TOF mass spectrometer was selected as instrument. The Mascot search results were imported to the MS Data Miner (MDM) software v. 1.2.2 with an ions score cut-off value of 45. MS/MS spectra validation of protein identifications based on less than 2 unique peptides with ion scores less than 100 were validated automatically in MDM. Only MS/MS spectra containing a consecutive b or y-ion series of at least 3 fragments were accepted in MDM. The remaining MS/MS spectra of protein identifications were manually validated as only spectra containing a clear sequence tag of at least three consecutive residues with high intensity fragment ions compared to the background were accepted. The data was then exported to excel and contaminating exogenous proteins were removed. Among these human tryptic peptides identical to porcine tryptic peptides were considered as contaminants as porcine trypsin was used for sample processing. The resulting endogenous proteins were listed according to their emPAI values, which reflect their relative abundance. The molar fractions of the endogenous proteins were calculated by dividing the emPAI value for each identified protein with the total emPAI value. The average molar fraction of the two technical replicates was calculated for each sample, and only proteins identified in both runs were accepted.