ABSTRACT:
We present a methodology using in vivo crosslinking combined with HPLC-MS for the global analysis of endogenous protein complexes by protein correlation profiling. Formaldehyde crosslinked protein complexes were extracted with high yield using denaturing buffers that maintained complex solubility during chromatographic separation. We show this efficiently detects both integral membrane and membrane-associated protein complexes,in addition to soluble complexes, allowing identification and analysis of complexes not accessible in native extracts. We compare the protein complexes detected by HPLC-MS protein correlation profiling in both native and formaldehyde crosslinked U2OS cell extracts. These proteome-wide data sets of both in vivo crosslinked and native protein complexes from U2OS cells are freely available via a searchable online database (www.peptracker.com/epd). Raw data are also available via ProteomeXchange (identifier PXD003754).
METHODS:
EXPERIMENTAL PROCEDURES
Materials
U2OS cells were purchased from the American Type Culture Collection (ATCC, Rockville, MD). Dulbecco's Modified Eagle Medium (DMEM), doxycycline/tetracycline-free fetal calf serum, antibiotics, NuPage gels, LDS sample buffer, MES SDS-PAGE running buffer, nitrocellulose iBlot stacks, SYPRO Ruby, Alexa Fluor 680-conjugated secondary antibodies, Dulbeccos's Phosphate Buffered Saline (PBS), EZQ protein quantitation reagent and CBQCA assay kit were obtained from Life Technologies (Carlsbad, CA). IrDye 800-conjugated secondary antibodies were obtained from Rockland Immunochemicals (Gilbertsville, PA). HRP conjugated secondaryantibodies were from Cell Signaling Technology (Danvers, MA). Formaldehyde ampules (10 ml, methanol free), bicinchoninic acid (BCA) assay reagents, Coomassie Plus (Bradford) reagent, Detergent Removal Plates, Acclaim Pepmap C18 columns and trapping cartridges and Triscarboxyethylphosphine (TCEP) (Bond-breaker neutral pH solution) were from Thermo Scientific (Waltham, MA). Trypsin Gold was from Promega. Sep-Pak tC18 96-well u-elution plates were from Waters (Milford, MA). GAPDH primary antibody, complete protease inhibitor mixture tablets and PhosStop phosphatase inhibitor tablets were from Roche (Basel, Switzerland). Odyssey Nitrocellulose Membrane was from Li-Cor Biosciences (Lincoln, NE). Ultrafree-MC 0.5 ml, 0.45 μm centrifugal filter units were from Millipore (Billerica, MA). All other materials were obtained from Sigma (St. Louis, MO).
Cell Culture
Briefly, U2OS cells were grown in DMEM supplemented with 10% FCS, 100 U/L penicillin and 100 μg/L streptomycin at 37 °C in 10% CO2, and passaged at ∼80% confluence.
In Vivo Crosslinking and Denaturing Extraction for Size Exclusion Chromatography
Each 15 cm dish (80% confluent) of adherent U2OS cells was washed three times with ice-cold PBS, on ice, with 20 ml used per wash. Plates were drained and 20 ml of freshly made 6% formaldehyde in PBS was added to crosslink proteins and slowly mixed for 30 min at room temperature. After draining, the crosslinked cells were quenched with 20 ml of 0.1 m Tris-HCl pH 8.0, 150 mm NaCl for 10 min at room temperature. After complete drainage of the dish, cells were scraped in 500 μl of freshly prepared lysis buffer (4% SDS, 100 mm NaCl, 10 mm sodium phosphate pH 6.0, 25 mm TCEP, 50 mm N-ethylmaleimide) at room temperature. Cell lysates were sonicated for 30 s, three times in total, at 10% power at room temperature. Lysates were heated to 37 °C for 30 min prior to centrifugation at 17,000 × g for 10 min at room temperature. Samples were filtered through 0.45 μm Ultrafree-MC centrifugal filter units.
SDS-PAGE and Immunoblotting
For immunoblotting nondenatured samples, Bradford protein quantitation assays were performed on the fractions. 20% SDS was added to each fraction to 2% final concentration and heated to 65 °C for 10 min. 100 μl of consecutive fractions were combined and chloroform methanol precipitation performed. Protein was then re-suspended in equal volumes of 1× LDS, 25 mm TCEP so the maximum concentration in the most concentrated fraction was 1 mg/ml, and heated to 65 °C for 10 min. Combined fractions were analyzed by the EZQ quantitation assay. 10 μl of each fraction was loaded per lane for SDS-PAGE. BCA protein quantitation was performed on denatured samples. Equal volumes (14 μl) of consecutive samples were combined and made up to a maximum of 0.1 mg/ml in 1× LDS/TCEP. 20 μl of sample was loaded per lane for SDS-PAGE. SDS-PAGE was performed using 4–12% (w/v) Bis-Tris NuPage gels using MES running buffer according to manufacturer's instructions but with the addition of 25 mm TCEP, in the LDS sample buffer. SYPRO Ruby staining was performed as per manufacturer's instructions. For Western blotting, separated proteins were electrophoretically transferred to either an iBlot nitrocellulose membrane, or Odyssey Nitrocellulose Membrane, blocked with 3% nonfat skim milk in 0.1% Tween-20 in TBS (TBST) and incubated with primary antibody in 5% BSA in TBST overnight at 4 °C. After incubation, membranes were washed three times in TBST and incubated with either HRP labeled, or Alexa fluor 680/IrDye 800 labeled, secondary antibodies in 3% nonfat skim milk in TBST. Proteins were visualized using Immobillon chemiluminescent substrate (Millipore) and imaged, either with a cooled CCD camera (Fuji) for HRP-labeled secondary antibodies, or a Licor Odyssey CLx imager for Alexa fluor 680/IrDye 800 labeled secondary antibodies.
Denaturing Size Exclusion Chromatography, Protein Digestion, and Peptide Clean-up
Using a Dionex Ultimate 3000 Bio-RS UHPLC system (Thermo Scientific), lysates were injected (100 μl per injection) onto a BioBasic SEC1000 column (300 × 7.8 mm, 5 μm particles, 1000Å pores) equilibrated with 0.2% SDS, 100 mm NaCl and 10 mm NaPO4 pH 6.0 at 30 °C. A buffer at pH 6.0 is used to prolong column lifetime. The flow rate was 0.2 ml min−1 and for each sample two injections were performed. For each injection 48 × 125 μl fractions were collected separately using a 96-well thin-walled PCR plate (Eppendorf) and heated to 95 °C for 30 min in a PCR machine, using a heated lid, to break all crosslinks. After heat reversal of crosslinks, samples were transferred to a 96-well low protein binding deep-well plate (Eppendorf) and Tris-HCl (1 m pH 8.0) was added to each fraction to a final concentration of 0.1 m to adjust the pH to 8.0. Proteins in each fraction were digested to peptides using either LysC alone (injection 1), or LysC and trypsin (injection 2), which were diluted in 0.1 m Tris-HCl and added at a ratio of 1:50 by weight, based upon an EZQ protein assay of the fractions, then incubated for 18 h at 37 °C.
Peptide Clean-up and Quantitation
SDS in peptide samples was removed using 96-well detergent removal plates (Thermo Scientific) and centrifugation according to manufacturer's instructions. Briefly, the resin in each well was washed three times with 300 μl of room temperature PBS, with centrifugation at 1000 × g to remove the solution after each wash. Peptide samples were applied to the resin in each well and incubated for 2 min at room temperature before collecting the filtrate (containing clean peptides) by centrifugation for 2 min at 1,000 g at room temperature into a 96-well low protein binding deepwell plate (Eppendorf). Peptides were then desalted after trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) was added to 1% (v/v) final concentration and peptides were purified using a Sep-Pak tC18 96-well u-elution plate (Waters). Peptides were eluted in 200 μl of 50% (v/v) acetonitrile 0.1% TFA and evaporated to dryness in a rotary evaporator prior to re-suspension in 5% (v/v) formic acid. Peptide concentrations were determined using the CBQCA assay (Thermo Scientific) and peptide standards derived from a BSA digest, after 25-fold dilution of peptide samples in 0.1 m borate buffer pH 9.3.
LC-MS/MS and Analysis of Spectra
Using a Thermo Fisher Scientific Ultimate 3000 RSLCnano UHPLC, peptides in 5% (v/v) formic acid (final volume ∼10 μl) were injected onto an Acclaim PepMap C18 nano-trap column. After washing with 2% (v/v) acetonitrile, 0.1% (v/v) formic acid, peptides were resolved on a 50 cm × 75 μm C18 EasySpray reverse phase analytical column with integrated emitter over a gradient from 2% acetonitrile to 35% acetonitrile over 220 min with a flow rate of 200 nL min-1. The peptides were ionized by electrospray ionization at +2.0 kV. Tandem mass spectrometry analysis was carried out on a Q-Exactive mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific) using HCD fragmentation. The data-dependent acquisition method used acquired MS/MS spectra on the top 30 most abundant ions at any one point during the gradient. All of the RAW MS data have been deposited to the ProteomeXchange Consortium (http://proteomecentral.proteomexchange.org) via the PRIDE partner repository with the data set identifier PXD003754. The RAW data produced by the mass spectrometer were analyzed using the MaxQuant quantitative proteomics software package (http://www.maxquant.org, version 1.5.1.3). The MaxQuant output has also been uploaded to the ProteomeXchange Consortium under the same identifier given above. This version of MaxQuant includes an integrated search engine, Andromeda. Peptide and Protein level identification were both set to a false discovery rate of 1% using a target-decoy based strategy. The database supplied to the search engine for peptide identifications was the Human Swissprot database downloaded on the April 17, 2015, containing 20,197 protein sequence entries. The mass tolerance was set to 4.5 ppm for precursor ions and MS/MS mass tolerance was set at 20 ppm. Enzyme was set to either LysC (cleavage C-terminal to lysine) or trypsin (cleavage C-terminal to lysine and arginine) with up to 2 missed cleavages. Deamidation of Asn and Gln, oxidation of Met, pyro-Glu (with peptide N-term Gln), phosphorylation of Ser/Thr/Tyr, and protein N-terminal acetylation were set as variable modifications. N-ethylmaleimide on Cys was searched as a fixed modification. The output from MaxQuant provided peptide level data as well as protein group level data. We used the protein groups as defined by the Maxquant package.
Experimental Design and Statistical Rationale
Three biological replicates were performed for the in vivo crosslinking and denaturing SEC analysis and this level of replication was chosen based upon the variance detected in previous experiments using SEC-based analysis. To achieve an unbiased analysis of native versus crosslinked fractions, we performed a combined MaxQuant analysis of RAW files from our previous U2OS Native SEC analysis and the PFA Crosslinked U2OS SEC analysis described here. To create an elution profile for an individual protein group in each of the three biological replicates in each experiment type (either native, or PFA crosslinked), we used the MaxQuant label free quantitation (LFQ) algorithm.
Initial Data Processing and Basic Clustering Analysis
These steps were performed using the R language (version 3.2.2). The LFQ intensity profile for each replicate was smoothed using a three-fraction sliding mean and the minima and maxima of each profile was normalized within the limits 0 and 1 respectively. The mean and standard deviation for each protein in each experiment type (i.e. either native, or crosslinked) across three biological replicates was calculated for subsequent plotting using the ggplot2 package (http://ggplot2.org/), correlation analysis, basic clustering and the machine learning-based protein complex prediction. From the three biological replicates, it was required that a protein be identified in at least two out of three replicates, with a minimum of two peptides in each. Proteins labeled as either contaminants, or reverse hits, were removed from the analysis. The mean profiles for each protein were hierarchically clustered within each experiment type (either native, or PFA-crosslinked). The basic hierarchical clustering was performed, separately, for the respective native and crosslinked data sets, using the Euclidean distance measurement and a 'complete' agglomeration method. The tree calculated for each data set was cut to generate clusters with a mean Pearson correlation coefficient of ∼0.95.
Comparison of Known Complexes between Native and Crosslinked Extracts
We compared each of the previously annotated protein complexes, either from CORUM, or from the most recent analysis of human cells with PCP-based analysis, with both our native and formaldehyde crosslinked U2OS cell protein data sets. For each protein complex we determined the number of member proteins identified in either our native, or crosslinked data sets. A protein complex was analyzed if the number of identified protein subunits was greater than or equal to 2 in either the native, or crosslinked data sets. For these selected protein complexes we determined the median Pearson correlation coefficient between all the possible combinations of unique protein pairs in the complex.
Machine Learning-based Protein Complex Prediction
We applied a pipeline similar to that applied previously for PCP analysis to predict protein complexes from the crosslinked data set. First, we compiled a custom python script to extract peaks from the LFQ intensity profiles. We used the scipy package to adapt a Ricker wavelet encompassing 2 to 8 fractions. The two minimum points of the wavelet were used to define the peak range. Any other profile values outside this range were set to 0. We applied several filters before considering peaks further. First, we set an arbitrary noise threshold for each peak at 15% of the maximum signal intensity of the profile. Second, we discarded peaks lying in a region of the fractionation profile corresponding to predicted molecular weight values either approximately equal to, or below, the protein dimer molecular weight. Third, we discarded peaks present in the void region (fractions 1 to 4). Fourth, we only considered peaks whose maxima were separated by a minimum of 3 fractions.
The resulting peak profiles were used to identify protein complexes using a machine learning approach. We used a logistic regression implemented with the scikit-learn python package to score peak pairs according to 6 features, namely: Coapex, Normalized Cross Correlation (NCC), Pearson Correlation Coefficient (PCC), String Score, HIPPIE score and Mentha score. The first three features are purely based on the peak profiles. The Coapex was used by Havugimana et al. and is based on the number of experiments (replicates in the crosslinked data set) in which the peak pairs showed maximum abundance in the same peak fraction. For our data set of 3 biological replicates the possible coapex scores were: 1 (3 of 3 replicates), 0.6 (2 of 3 replicates), 0.3 (1 of 3 replicates), and 0 (none of the replicates). The NCC was derived in 2 steps. First, we computed the maximum cross correlation between the two peak pairs P1–2CC. We then computed the maximum self-cross-correlation of the first peak (P1CC) and the max self-cross-correlation of the second peak (P2CC). The NCC was finally derived as P1–2CC/max(P1CC, P2CC). The NCC assume values between 0 and 1. The PCC was computed as the Pearson correlation score between the two peaks and range in value from −1 to 1. The other 3 features are derived from protein interaction databases, as described previously. The rationale for these features is to try to promote peak pairs from proteins that have been previously reported to interact in the literature. With this we attempted to de-noise the data from peaks that may have similar elution profiles by chance. The String score was taken from the STRING database (version 10) and was normalized to have values from 0 to 1. The mentha score was taken from the mentha database (version 06–12-2015) and the hippie score from the HIPPIE database (version 09–01-15). Both the menthe and the hippie scores ranged in value from 0 to 1. We calculated the 6 features for all the possible permutations of peak pairs that showed the maximum abundance in the same fraction ± 1, creating a matrix (test set) of 1,394,292 peak pairs each with six features.
For the machine learning we first assembled a data set of “gold standard” true positive peak pairs (GD). To obtain these pairs we used the CORUM database of curated protein complexes and extracted all the peak pairs belonging to 90 complexes, creating a matrix of 551 unique true positive peak pairs. A true negative data set was extracted by random sampling of the 551 true positive peak pairs, between all the possible combinations of peaks belonging to proteins annotated in different complexes. As it would be possible to introduce false negative interactions in this step, we repeated the random sampling 100 times. Finally, using these true positive and true negative test pairs we assembled 100 logistic regression classifiers based on the same true positive pairs, but with each using a different true negative set. All the classifiers were inspected to determine the AUC values of the ROC curve in 10-fold cross validation. The median values of the probability score outputs of the 100 classifiers were used as the final score for the test set. We selected a score cut-off of 0.75 and we imported the 52,048 peak pairs above this threshold to the ClusterONE algorithm. We created a search matrix for the ClusterONE program with the parameters d (0.1 to 1, step 0.1), haircut (0.1 to 1, step 0.1) and s fixed to 2. The output was parsed to derive the parameters that were optimal to obtain the maximum number of GD true positive peaks grouped together.