ABSTRACT:
Osteoarthritis (OA) is a common disease characterized by cartilage degeneration and joint remodeling. The underlying molecular changes underpinning disease progression are incompletely understood. We investigated genes and pathways that mark OA progression in isolated primary chondrocytes taken from paired intact versus degraded articular cartilage samples across 38 patients undergoing joint replacement surgery (discovery cohort: 12 knee OA, replication cohorts: 17 knee OA, 9 hip OA patients). We combined genome-wide DNA methylation, RNA sequencing, and quantitative proteomics data. We identified 49 genes differentially regulated between intact and degraded cartilage in at least two –omics levels, 16 of which have not previously been implicated in OA progression. Integrated pathway analysis implicated the involvement of extracellular matrix degradation, collagen catabolism and angiogenesis in disease progression. Using independent replication datasets, we showed that the direction of change is consistent for over 90% of differentially expressed genes and differentially methylated CpG probes. AQP1, COL1A1 and CLEC3B were significantly differentially regulated across all three –omics levels, confirming their differential expression in human disease. Through integration of genome-wide methylation, gene and protein expression data in human primary chondrocytes, we identified consistent molecular players in OA progression that replicated across independent datasets and that have translational potential.
METHODS:
Methods
For full details of methods see Supplementary Methods.
Patients and samples
Osteochondral samples were collected from 38 patients undergoing total joint replacement for OA (discovery cohort: 12 knee OA patients; 2 separate replication cohorts: 17 knee OA patients, 9 hip OA patients). Cartilage was separated from bone and chondrocytes were extracted from each sample. DNA, RNA, and protein were extracted from the isolated chondrocytes of each sample. All patients provided full written informed consent prior to participation. We obtained two cartilage samples from each patient. Knee samples were scored using the OARSI cartilage classification system: one sample with high OARSI grade signifying high-grade degeneration (“degraded sample”), and one sample with low OARSI grade signifying healthy tissue or low-grade degeneration (“intact sample”) (Supplementary Fig. S1). Hip samples were classified macroscopically and visually as high-grade (“degraded”) or low-grade (“intact”), details see Supplementary Methods.
Proteomics (discovery cohort)
LC-MS analysis was performed on the Dionex Ultimate 3000 UHPLC system coupled with the high-resolution LTQ Orbitrap Velos mass spectrometer. Proteins were defined as differentially abundant if the absolute median abundance ratio between degraded and intact samples was ≥ 0.75, the absolute median abundance ratio was greater than the standard deviation of abundance ratios, and the protein was detected in paired samples from at least 5 of 11 patients post-QC.
RNA-seq (discovery cohort)
Multiplexed libraries were sequenced on the Illumina HiSeq 2000 (75 bp paired-end read length) and individual indexed library BAM files were produced. Reads that passed quality control (QC) were re-aligned using tophat2, and reads aligning to each gene in each sample were counted using the HTSeq package. Absolute transcript abundance was calculated using the FPKM (fragments per kilobase of transcript per million fragments mapped) measure across 15,418 genes post-QC. We used edgeR v3.0 to identify differentially expressed genes, applying a generalized linear model for tissue status (degraded or intact) with individual ID as covariate, and defined significance at 5% false-discovery rate (FDR).
Methylation (discovery cohort)
Methylation was assayed using the Illumina 450k BeadChip. Data were parsed and QCed using ChAMP; the probe beta values were quantile-normalized using the ‘dasen’ method from the wateRmelon package. Differential methylation on 425,694 probes post-QC was tested using the CpGassoc package, applying a linear model for tissue status at each probe, with individual ID as covariate.
Following previous analyses, differentially methylated regions (DMRs) were defined as regions of at least 3 probes with FDR ≤ 5% (DMPs) and no more than 3 non-significant probes, with no more than 1 kb between adjacent probes. We used bedtools to identify genes overlapping each DMR, extending gene boundaries to include likely promoter regions.
For a promoter-level analysis, we used the probe annotations from ChAMP to assign promoter probes to each gene. After computing the mean beta value in the promoter of each gene in each sample, we used a paired t-test to identify genes with differential promoter-region methylation between degraded and intact samples. Significance was set at 5% FDR.
Replication of gene expression and methylation changes
Gene expression and DNA methylation in both replication cohorts were measured using the same procedure as for the discovery data. We considered the expression of 14,762 genes that passed QC across all datasets; this included 332 of 349 genes with FDR ≤ 5% in the knee discovery data.
We considered 416,437 probes that passed QC across all datasets; this included 9,723 of 9,867 probes with FDR ≤ 5% in the knee discovery data (“DMPs”).
In silico replication
We carried out an additional replication analysis for gene expression changes using an available published dataset from the ongoing Research Arthritis and Articular Cartilage (RAAK) study. This dataset comprised a comparison of affected and macroscopically preserved OA cartilage from 33 patients undergoing total joint replacement surgery (22 with hip OA, 11 with knee OA), measured using the Illumina HumanHT-12 v3 microarrays.
Gene set analyses
We tested whether particular biological gene sets were enriched among significant genes from each of the RNA-seq, methylation, and proteomics datasets. We used KEGG, Reactome, and, separately, Gene Ontology (GO) annotations. Genes annotated to the same term were treated as a “pathway”. Enrichment was assessed using a 1-sided hypergeometric test, with significance at 5% FDR. Empirical p-values for the enrichments were obtained from randomisations.
For each gene set, we asked whether the association across the three –omics datasets (calculated as geometric mean of the p-values) was higher than expected by chance, obtaining empirical p-values from 100,000 randomisations.
Ethical approval information
The study was approved by Oxford NHS REC C (10/H0606/20). Tissue samples were collected under National Research Ethics approval reference 15/SC/0132, South Yorkshire and North Derbyshire Musculoskeletal Biobank, University of Sheffield; and under National Research Ethics approval reference 11/EE/0011, Cambridge Biomedical Research Centre Human Research Tissue Bank, Cambridge University Hospitals, UK. All participants provided written informed consent. All methods were carried out in accordance with the relevant guidelines and regulations.
Data availability
All genome-wide summary statistics generated in the discovery component of this study are available as Supplementary Tables. All discovery RNA sequencing data are available in the EGA repository, https://www.ebi.ac.uk/ega/studies/EGAS00001001203. All discovery methylation data are available in the EGA repository, https://www.ebi.ac.uk/ega/studies/EGAS00001001213. The discovery proteomics data has been deposited in the PRIDE archive under study ID PXD002014 [publication in process].