ABSTRACT:
MicroRNAs (miRNAs) are small non-coding RNAs that regulate gene expression and protein synthesis. To characterize functions of miRNAs and to assess their potential applications, we carried out an integrated multi-omics analysis to study miR-145, a miRNA that has been shown to suppress tumor growth. We employed gene expression profiling, miRNA profiling and quantitative proteomic analysis of a pancreatic cancer cell line. In our transcriptomic analysis, overexpression of miR-145 was found to suppress the expression of genes that are implicated in development of cancer such as ITGA11 and MAGEA4 in addition to previously described targets such as FSCN1, YES1 and PODXL. Based on miRNA profiling, overexpression of miR-145 also upregulated other miRNAs including miR-124, miR-133b and miR-125a-3p, all of which are implicated in suppression of tumors and are generally co-regulated with miR-145 in other cancers. Using the SILAC system, we identified miR-145-induced downregulation of several oncoproteins/cancer biomarkers including SET, RPA1, MCM2, ABCC1, SPTBN1 and SPTLC1. Luciferase assay validation carried out on a subset of downregulated candidate targets confirmed them to be novel direct targets of miR-145. Overall, this multi-omics approach provided insights into miR-145-mediated tumor suppression and could be used as a general strategy to study the targets of individual miRNAs.
METHODS:
Experimental section
Cell culture, SILAC labeling and miRNA transfection
A pancreatic cancer cell line, MiaPaCa-2, was maintained in Dulbecco’s Modified Eagle’ Medium (DMEM, Invitrogen, Carlsbad, CA) supplemented with L-glutamine, 10% FBS, 100 U ml−1 penicillin and 100 μg ml−1 streptomycin. Growth of these cells were incubated in 5% CO2 at 37 °C and adapted to the SILAC media as described earlier. The heavy medium was labeled with 13C6,15N2-lysine, 13C6,15N4-arginine. Cells grown in the heavy medium were transfected with 50 nM miR-145 mimic oligonucleotides while those grown in light medium were transfected with scrambled RNA control (Dharmacon, Lafayette, CO).
Protein extraction and in-gel digestion
Cells from scrambled RNA and miR-145 transfection were harvested in 2% SDS lysis buffer, homogenized and sonicated. Protein concentration was measured using Lowry assay. Equal amount of protein from control and miR-145-transfected samples were mixed and ~ 200 μg was loaded on SDS-PAGE. The gel was stained with colloidal Coomassie blue. The protein bands were excised and were subjected to in-gel digestion, as described previously. Briefly, proteins were reduced using 5 mM dithiothreitol in 40 mM ammonium bicarbonate in 40% acetonitrile at 60 °C for 20 minutes and alkylated using 20 mM iodoacetamide in 40% acetonitrile. In-gel trypsin digestion was carried out at 1:20 enzyme to protein ratio at 37 °C overnight.
Strong cation exchange chromatography (SCX) and OFFGEL fractionation
Protein were reduced and alkylated with 5 mM DTT and 10 mM iodoacetamide, respectively. In-solution trypsin digestion was carried out at 1: 20 enzyme to protein ratio overnight at 37 °C. The peptides were fractionated by SCX. SCX fractionation was carried out on a PolySULPHOETHYL A column (PolyLC, Columbia, MD, USA) using an Agilent 1200 HPLC system containing a binary pump, UV detector and a fraction collector. Fractionation of peptides was carried out by a linear gradient between solvent A (10 mM KH2PO4, 25% Acetonitrile, pH 2.8) and solvent B (350 mM KCl in solvent A) from 8% to 50% solvent B over 60 min. UV absorbance of eluted peptides were detected at 214 nm. The peptide fractions were pooled based on chromatography profile into 24 fractions, vacuum-dried and stored at −20 °C. Peptides were reconstituted in 40 μl of 0.1% formic acid prior to LC-MS/MS analysis. Proteins as well as peptides were fractionated using OFFGEL fractionator (Agilent Technologies, Santa Clara, CA, USA). Briefly, around 100 μg of peptides/proteins in 2.4 ml of 5% glycerol buffer with 0.5% ampholytes (pH 3–10) was fractionated into 12 fractions in 24 h. Fractions were collected and stored at −20 °C.
Mass spectrometry
Peptide fractions were analyzed on an LTQ-Orbitrap Velos mass spectrometer coupled to Agilent 1200 series nano HPLC system. The MS1 scans were acquired in the m/z range of 350–1800 while MS2 scans were acquired in 100–2000 m/z using higher-energy collisional dissociation (HCD). Top 15 precursor ions were chosen for MS2 analysis in each duty cycle. Precursor ions with singly charged and unknown charges were excluded for MS2 analyses. Mass spectrometry raw data were searched against Human RefSeq protein database (Release 46) using Proteome Discoverer platform (Thermo, Bremen, Germany). We used Mascot and SEQUEST search algorithms with following search parameters: trypsin as a protease with maximum one allowed missed cleavage; carbamidomethylation of cysteine as a fixed modification; oxidation of methionine, acetylation of protein N-terminus and deamidation of glutamine. Mass tolerances at MS and MS/MS were set to 20 ppm and 0.1 Da, respectively. FDR of 1% was used for peptide validation. The proteomic datasets are accessible in the PRIDE Archive with the accession number: PXD001260.
Gene expression and miRNA microarray analysis
One μg total RNA was used on Agilent-014850 Whole Human Genome Microarray platform (4×44K G4112F). miR-145-transfected and control samples were analyzed in dye-swap duplicates (Pearson correlation coefficients were 0.99 and 0.99, respectively). One-hundred ng total RNA was used on Agilent’s-Human miRNA Microarray platform (V3). Samples were collected 24 and 48 h after miRNA transfection and were analyzed in duplicate. Raw data were pre-processed using the R package “Limma”. Briefly, for the gene expression microarray experiments, normalization within arrays was carried out using “Loess” method and normalization between arrays was carried out using the “Scale” method. For the miRNA microarray experiments, normalization between arrays was carried out with the “Quantile” method. Both microarray analyses were performed using a generalized linear model approach, coupled with empirical Bayes shrinkage of standard errors. Adjustment for multiple testing was achieved using the Benjamini and Hochberg method. Raw data and analyses were uploaded to Gene Expression Omnibus at the National Center for Biotechnology Information with the accession numbers: GSE45245 for gene expression microarray and GSE45246 for miRNA microarray.
Luciferase assays
3′UTRs of candidate miR-145 target genes were cloned into the pLightSwitch-3UTR control vector (SwitchGear Genomics, Carlsbad, CA) which contains an upstream Renilla luciferase open reading frame. Twenty-four hours before co-transfection, 3 × 104 MiaPaCa-2 cells were seeded in each well of 48-well plates. For co-transfection, 10 ng of the pLightSwitch-3UTR vector and 100 ng of the firefly luciferase-based pGL3 control vector were mixed with either miR-145 mimic (40 nM) or scrambled RNA oligos, packaged with Lipofectamine 2000 reagent (Invitrogen) to enter MiaPaCa-2 cells. Luciferase assays were carried out using the Dual-Luciferase® Reporter Assay System (Promega, San Luis Obispo, CA). The miR-145 seed sequence in 3′UTR was deleted using QuikChange Lightning Site-Directed Mutagenesis Kit (Agilent). Firefly luciferase activity was normalized to Renilla luciferase activity for each transfected well. For each experimental trial, cells were transfected in triplicate. For each 3′UTR construct, the ratio of miR-145 mimic to scrambled RNA oligos was calculated.
Invasion assays
Growth factor-reduced Matrigel invasion chambers (BD) were used according to the manufacturer’ instructions. Briefly, MiaPaCa-2 cells (5 × 104 ml−1 in DMEM + 0.1% FBS) in invasion chambers were transferred and exposed to the chemo-attractant DMEM + 5% FBS. Forty-eight hours later, noninvasive cells were wiped off using cotton swabs. Invasive cells were fixed in 10% formalin for 5 minutes, and then the Matrigel membranes were cut and mounted in DAPI to count cell nuclei.
Bioinformatics and statistical analysis
A web-based bioinformatics tool was developed in house for analyzing miRNA binding sites. All statistics analyses were performed in R 2.14 (64-bit). ANOVA and TukeyHSD multiple comparison tests were performed to compare effects of different target site matching on transcript and protein levels. To analyze luciferase assay results, Welch’s two sample t-test was used based on the different variance between control and miR-145-treated groups. The correlation between transcript and protein fold changes was calculated using Pearson’s product-moment correlation. To calculate the enrichment of miR-145 seed sequence in miR-145-downregulated transcripts/proteins, Fisher’s Exact tests were used in the contingency table analysis. To calculate the enrichment of 8mer target site matching in 3′UTRs, a Pearson’s Chi-squared test with Yate’s continuity correction was used. TargetScan Release 6.2 (http://www.targetscan.org/) was used for analysis of miRNA targeting context scores. TarBase 6.0 (http://www.microrna.gr/tarbase) was used as a curated database of known miR-145 targets. To obtain pathway enrichment analysis, we employed IPA® Core Analysis (Ingenuity System Inc. USA) and its embedded Fisher’s exact test (right-tailed).