ABSTRACT:
Correct classification of cancer patients into subtypes is a prerequisite for acute diagnosis and effective treatment. Currently this classification relies mainly on histological assessment, but gene expression analysis by microarrays has shown great promise. Here we show that high accuracy, quantitative proteomics can robustly segregate cancer subtypes directly at the level of expressed proteins. We investigated two histologically indistinguishable subtypes of diffuse large B-cell lymphoma (DLBCL): activated B-cell-like (ABC) and germinal-center B-cell-like (GCB) subtypes, by first developing a general lymphoma stable isotope labeling with amino acids in cell culture (SILAC) mix from heavy stable isotope-labeled cell lines. This super-SILAC mix was combined with cell lysates from five ABC-DLBCL and five GCB-DLBCL cell lines. Shotgun proteomic analysis on a linear ion trap Orbitrap mass spectrometer with high mass accuracy at the MS and MS/MS levels yielded a proteome of more than 7,500 identified proteins. High accuracy of quantification allowed robust separation of subtypes by principal component analysis. The main contributors to the classification included proteins known to be differentially expressed between the subtypes such as the transcription factors IRF4 and SPI1/PU.1, cell surface markers CD44 and CD27, as well as novel candidates. We extracted a signature of 55 proteins that segregated subtypes and contained proteins connected to functional differences between the ABC and GCB-DLBCL subtypes, including many NF-κB-regulated genes. Shortening the analysis time to single-shot analysis combined with use of the new linear quadrupole Orbitrap analyzer (Q Exactive) also clearly differentiated between the subtypes. These results show that high resolution shotgun proteomics combined with super-SILAC-based quantification is a promising new technology for tumor characterization and classification.
METHODS:
EXPERIMENTAL PROCEDURES
Cell Culture Sample Preparation
ABC-DLBCL cell lines (HBL1, OciLy3, RIVA, TMD8, and U2932) and GCB-DLBCL cell lines (BJAB, DB, HT, SUDHL-4, and SUDHL-6) were grown in RPMI medium (Invitrogen) supplemented with 20% fetal bovine serum. Cell lysis was performed using a buffer consisting of 4% SDS, 0.1 m DTT, and 0.1 m Tris-HCl pH 7.5 followed by incubation at 95 °C for 5 min. The lysates were sonicated using a Branson type sonicator and then centrifuged at 16,100 × g for 10 min.
Cell lines selected for inclusion in the super-SILAC mix were grown in RPMI medium containing 13C615N2-lysine (Lys8) and 13C615N4-arginine (Arg10) (Cambridge Isotope Laboratories) instead of the natural amino acids and supplemented with 20% dialyzed fetal bovine serum. The cells were cultured for at least six passages until they were fully labeled as assessed by quantitative mass spectrometry. Less than 1% of tryptic peptides contained unlabeled arginine or lysine in the nine labeled cell lines (Ramos, Mutu, BL-41, U2932, OciLy3, BJAB, L1236, L428, and DB) and less than 0.3% of identified peptides showed evidence of Arg to Pro conversion. Equal amounts of the heavy lysates were mixed to generate the super-SILAC mix.
Protein Digestion and Fractionation
The super-SILAC mix (100 μg) was combined with an equal amount of the unlabeled cells and further processed by the filter-aided sample preparation (FASP) method. In short, the sample was loaded on Microcon filters with a 30-kDa cutoff (Millipore, Billerica, MA), which allows the replacement of SDS with a urea containing buffer. The proteins were then alkylated with iodoacetamide followed by overnight trypsin digestion at 37 °C in 50 mm ammonium bicarbonate. Peptides were collected from the filter after centrifugation and elution with water (2×).
Using strong anion exchange chromatography, 40 μg of the peptide mixture from each replicate was fractionated. In summary, the strong anion exchange (SAX) was performed in tip columns prepared from 200-μl micropipet tips stacked with six layers of a 3M Empore anion exchange disk (1214-5012; Varian, Palo Alto, CA). We used Britton & Robinson universal buffer composed of 20 mm acetic acid, 20 mm phosphoric acid, and 20 mm boric acid and titrated with NaOH to the desired pH for column equilibration and fraction elution. After loading the peptides at pH 11 and collecting it, five additional fractions were collected consecutively with buffers of pH 8, 6, 5, 4, and 3. The eluted fractions were desalted on reversed phase C18 Empore disc StageTips. Peptide elution was performed twice with 20 μl of buffer B containing 80% ACN in 0.5% acetic acid. Organic solvents were removed by a SpeedVac concentrator to prepare the samples for analysis by LC-MS/MS.
Liquid Chromatography and MS for Fractionation Experiments
Eluted peptides were separated on an in-house-made 15-cm column with a 75-μm inner diameter packed with ReproSil-Pur C18-AQ 3 μm resin (Dr. Maisch GmbH, Ammerbuch-Entringen, Germany) using an Easy nanoflow HPLC system (Proxeon Biosystems, now Thermo Fisher Scientific). The HPLC was coupled via a nanoelectrospray ion source (Proxeon Biosystems) to an LTQ-Orbitrap Velos mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Approximately 2 μg of peptides were loaded in buffer A (0.5% (v/v) acetic acid) with a flow rate of 500 nl min−1 and eluted with a 200-min linear gradient at a flow rate of 200 nl min−1. Four different gradients were applied for optimal separation based on average peptide hydrophobicity. A gradient of 2–25% buffer B to separate the pH 11 fraction; 7–25% buffer B for the pH 8 fraction; 7–30% buffer B for the pH 6 and 5 fractions; and 7–37% buffer B for the pH 4 and 3 fractions. After each gradient, the column was washed, reaching 90% buffer B followed by re-equilibration with buffer A.
The mass spectra were acquired with an automatic switch between a full scan and up to 10 data-dependent MS/MS scans. Target value for the full scan MS spectra were 1,000,000 and resolution was 30,000 at m/z 400. Up to the 10 most intense ions (minimum signal threshold of 5,000) were sequentially isolated and accumulated to a target value of 40,000 with a maximum injection time of 150 ms and were fragmented by higher energy collisional dissociation. For a subset of measurements, MS/MS target values were set to 50,000. The spectra of the fragmented ions were acquired in the Orbitrap analyzer with resolution of 7,500 at m/z 400.
Liquid Chromatography and MS for Single-shot Experiments
The peptides were separated on an in-house-made 50-cm column with a 75-μm inner diameter packed with 1.8 μm C18 resin (Dr. Maisch GmbH, Ammerbuch-Entringen, Germany). The Thermo EASY-nLC 1000 system with a binary buffer system consisting of 0.5% formic acid (buffer A) and 80% acetonitrile in 0.5% formic acid (buffer B) was used for reverse phase chromatography. Peptides (∼4 μg) were eluted with a 220-min linear gradient of buffer B up to 30% at a flow rate of 250 nl min−1. The column temperature was kept at 40 °C by an in-house designed oven with a Peltier element. The LC was coupled to a Q Exactive mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific) via the nanoelectrospray source (Proxeon Biosystems, now Thermo Fisher Scientific). Mass spectra were acquired on the Q Exactive in a data-dependent mode with an automatic switch between a full scan and up to 10 data-dependent MS/MS scans. Target value for the full scan MS spectra was 3,000,000 with a maximum injection time of 20 ms and a resolution of 70,000 at m/z 400. The 10 most intense ions with charge two or more from the survey scan were selected with an isolation window of 1.6 Th and fragmented by higher energy collisional dissociation with normalized collision energies of 25. The ion target value for MS/MS was set to 1,000,000 with a maximum injection time of 60 ms and a resolution of 17,500 at m/z 400. These settings lead to constant injection times of 60 ms, fully in parallel with transient acquisition of the previous scan, ensuring fast cycle times. Repeat sequencing of peptides was kept to a minimum by dynamic exclusion of the sequenced peptides for 25 s.
Data Analysis
The acquired raw files were analyzed by MaxQuant (version 1.2.0.34). Andromeda, a probabilistic search engine incorporated into the MaxQuant framework, was used to search the peak lists against the IPI human database version 3.68 which contains 87,083 entries. Common contaminants were added to this database. The search included cysteine carbamidomethylation as a fixed modification and N-terminal acetylation and methionine oxidation as variable modifications. The second peptide identification option in Andromeda was enabled. For statistical evaluation of the data obtained, the posterior error probability and false discovery rate were used. The false discovery rate was determined by searching a reverse database. A false discovery rate of 0.01 for proteins and peptides was required. Enzyme specificity was set to trypsin allowing N-terminal cleavage to proline. Two miscleavages were allowed, and a minimum of six amino acids per identified peptide were required. Peptide identification was based on a search with an initial mass deviation of the precursor ion of up to 6 ppm, and the allowed fragment mass deviation was set to 20 ppm. The mass accuracy of the precursor ions was improved by retention time-dependent mass recalibration. To match identifications across different replicates and adjacent fractions, the “match between runs” option in MaxQuant was enabled within a time window of 2 min. Quantification of SILAC pairs was performed by MaxQuant with standard settings using a minimum ratio count of 2. Bioinformatics analysis was done with Perseus tools available in the MaxQuant environment.
When needed for the analysis, the missing values were replaced using data imputation. The idea of our algorithm for imputation of missing values is that they should simulate signals of low abundant proteins. To accomplish this, we first determine the mean and standard deviation of all valid values in the matrix. Then we draw numbers for the missing entries from a suitable probability distribution in an independently, identically distributed way. For that purpose, we use a normal distribution with a mean and standard deviation adjusted in such a way as to simulate signals of low abundant proteins. This is necessary because the missing values are biased toward the detection limit of the LC-MS/MS measurement. Optimal values for the down shift parameter were adjusted in a way that the distribution of imputed values adjusts smoothly to the lower end of the distribution of measured values. We iteratively adjusted the values to avoid too large or too small down shifts. The former would result in a separation of imputed and measured values (a bi-modal total distribution), whereas the latter would introduce too much noise into the system and would potentially destroy protein signatures. The two values for downshifting and width adjustment are determined once but then apply to all the cell lines. These optimal values were different for the label-free and SILAC reference cases. For label-free data, we employed a width of 0.3 and a downshift of 1.8; in the super-SILAC data, the width was 0.3, and the downshift was 0.5, each in units of the standard deviation of the distribution of present values.