ABSTRACT:
Background
Tumor classification based on their predicted responses to kinase inhibitors is a major goal for advancing targeted personalized therapies. Here, we used a phosphoproteomic approach to investigate biological heterogeneity across hematological cancer cell lines including acute myeloid leukemia, lymphoma, and multiple myeloma.
Results
Mass spectrometry was used to quantify 2,000 phosphorylation sites across three acute myeloid leukemia, three lymphoma, and three multiple myeloma cell lines in six biological replicates. The intensities of the phosphorylation sites grouped these cancer cell lines according to their tumor type. In addition, a phosphoproteomic analysis of seven acute myeloid leukemia cell lines revealed a battery of phosphorylation sites whose combined intensities correlated with the growth-inhibitory responses to three kinase inhibitors with remarkable correlation coefficients and fold changes (> 100 between the most resistant and sensitive cells). Modeling based on regression analysis indicated that a subset of phosphorylation sites could be used to predict response to the tested drugs. Quantitative analysis of phosphorylation motifs indicated that resistant and sensitive cells differed in their patterns of kinase activities, but, interestingly, phosphorylations correlating with responses were not on members of the pathway being targeted; instead, these mainly were on parallel kinase pathways.
Conclusion
This study reveals that the information on kinase activation encoded in phosphoproteomics data correlates remarkably well with the phenotypic responses of cancer cells to compounds that target kinase signaling and could be useful for the identification of novel markers of resistance or sensitivity to drugs that target the signaling network.
METHODS:
Materials and methods
Cell culture
Cell lines were obtained as indicated in Additional file 1, Table S1 and Additional file 1, Table S2. All cell lines were grown in RPMI-1640 media supplemented with 10% FBS and 100 units/mL penicillin/streptomycin at 37°C in a humidified atmosphere of 5% CO2. For experiments, 10 x106 cells at 0.5 × 106 cells/mL were seeded 24 h before harvesting for each replicate.
Viability assay
Cell lines were seeded in 96-well plates and treated 24 h later with 1 μM PI-103 (Calbiochem cat # 528100), 10 μM MEK inhibitor I (referred as MEK-i hereafter, Calbiochem cat # 444937), or 1 μM JAK inhibitor (referred as JAK-i hereafter, Calbiochem cat # 420099) for a further 72 h. Cell viability was assessed by MTS assay (CellTiter 96® AQueousOne Solution Cell Proliferation assay, Promega Corporation, Madison, WI, USA).
Cell lysis, digestion, and solid-phase extraction
Cells were harvested by centrifugation at 300 × g for 5 min and washed twice with ice cold Dulbecco's Phosphate Buffered Saline (DPBS) supplemented with 1 mM Na3VO4 and 1 mMNaF. Cell pellets were lyzed with 1 mL denaturing buffer (8 M urea in 20 mM HEPES pH 8.0) supplemented with phosphatase inhibitors (1 mM Na3VO4, 1 mMNaF, 1 mM β-glycerol phosphate, 1.25 mM sodium pyrophosphate) and further homogenized by sonication (three pulses of 15 s). Cell debris was removed by centrifugation (20,000 g for 5 min at 5°C), protein levels in the supernatant were quantified by Bradford analysis and an aliquot containing 500 μg of protein was diluted to a final volume of 1 mL in denaturing buffer. Cysteines were reduced and alkylated by sequential incubation with 4.1 mMdithiothreitol and 8.3 mMiodoacetamide for 15 min at room temperature in the dark. Samples were diluted to a final concentration of 2 M urea using 20 mM HEPES (pH 8.0) and proteins were digested with TLCK-Trypsin (20 TAME units/mg) for 16 h at 37°C. Trypsin was removed by centrifugation and the resultant peptide solutions desalted by solid-phase extraction with Sep-Pak C18 columns (Waters UK Ltd, Manchester, UK) following the manufacturer's instructions.
Immobilized metal ion affinity chromatography (IMAC)
Phosphopeptides were enriched by IMAC using a modified protocol previously described. In brief, Sep-Pak eluents were incubated for 1 h at room temperature with 300 μL of equilibrated Fe(III) coated sepharose beads used as 50% slurry in 50:50:0.1 acetonitrile:water:TFA. For equilibration, beads were washed twice with 200 mM EDTA, three times with 50:50:0.1 acetonitrile:water:TFA, incubated twice for 5 min at RT with 100 mM FeCl3 (same volume as beads) and washed six times with 50% ACN/0.1% TFA. Unbound peptides were discarded and beads were sequentially washed with 300 μL of 50% acetonitrile/0.1% TFA and 300 μL of 50% acetonitrile/1% TFA. Phosphopeptides were recovered by incubating the beads twice with 300 μL50% acetonitrile/1.5% ammonia water pH 11.0 for 1 min, after which the recovered solutions were pooled, acidified (by addition of 10% formic acid), dried in a speedvac, and stored at -80°C until analysis.
Nanoflow-liquid chromatography tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS)
Phosphopeptides were resuspended in 0.1% TFA and analyzed in a LC-MS/MS system in random order to remove potential batch effects. Phosphoprotein separation was performed in a nanoflow ultra-high pressure liquid chromatography system (nanoAcquity, Waters) using a BEH 100 μm × 100 mm column (Waters) and a binary mobile phase gradient with 0.1% formic acid in LC-MS grade water (A) 0.1% formic acid in LC-MS grade acetonitrile (solution B). Gradients used were as follows: 1% B for 5 min, 1% B to 35% B over 100 min, a 5-min wash at 85% B, and a 7-min equilibration step at 1% B. The instrument delivered a flow rate of 5 μL/min (loading) and 400 nL/min (gradient elution) with an operating back pressure of about 3,000 psi. Phosphopeptides were directly eluted into an LTQ-Orbitrap XL mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Hemel Hempstead, UK). This instrument acquired full scan survey spectra (m/z 350-1,600) with a resolution of 60,000 at m/z 400. A maximum of the five most abundant multiply charged ions present in each survey spectrum were automatically mass-selected in a data dependent manner, fragmented by collision-induced dissociation (CID) (normalized collision energy 35%), and analyzed in the LTQ. Thus, full-MS scans were followed by a maximum of 5 MS/MS scans (m/z 50-2,000) resulting in a maximum duty cycle of 2.5 s. For CID fragmentation multi-stage activation was enabled. Because chromatographic peaks were about 30 s at the base, these settings ensured that there were at least 10 data points per extracted ion chromatogram (XIC). In the data dependent acquisition, a dynamic exclusion was enabled with the exclusion list restricted to 500 entries, exclusion duration of 40 s and mass window of 10 ppm.
Identification and quantitation of phosphopeptides
For phosphopeptide identification, mascot Distiller 2.3.2 was used to smoothen and centroid the MS/MS data. The processed files were searched against the human sequence library in the SwissProt database (version 2010_03 containing 23,000 entries) using the Mascot search engine. Searches were automated with Mascot Daemon (v2.2.2; Matrix Science, London, UK). The search parameters included the following parameters: trypsin as digestion enzyme with two missed cleavages allowed, carbamidomethyl (C) as fixed modification, and Pyro-glu (N-term), Oxidation (M), and Phospho (STY) as variable modifications. A mass tolerance of ± 7 ppm for the precursor ion and ± 800 mmu for fragment ions was allowed. Hits were considered significant when they had an Expectation value of < 0.05 (as returned by Mascot). False discovery rates were approximately 2% as determined by decoy database searches. Results from Mascot searches were deposited in to the ProteomeXchange Consortium via the PRIDE partner repository with the dataset identifier PXD000217 and DOI 10.6019/PXD000217. Sites of modification were reported when the Mascot delta score was > 10; otherwise site assignment was deemed ambiguous. Phosphopeptides are reported in the results as gene name followed by phosphorylation site within the protein sequence and charge of the measured ion.
Phosphopeptide quantification was performed as described before. Briefly, Pescal was used to align the chromatograms of all samples to be analyzed, to construct extracted ion chromatograms (XICs) for the first three isotopes of each phosphopeptide ion selected for quantitation, to pick the peaks to be quantified, and to measure their peak height and area. Windows of molecular mass and retention time were 7 ppm and 1.5 min, respectively. The resulting quantitative data were parsed into Excel files for further normalization and statistical analysis. Phosphopeptide intensities were normalized to the total chromatogram intensity and to the mean value across samples.
PCA, clustering, and statistical analysis of MS data
To avoid interference from low intensity phosphopeptides that have the lowest quantification quality, a peak intensity cut-off value was established. Thus, only the phosphopeptides with a maximum intensity across all samples above that cut-off were included in further data analysis by principal component analysis (PCA) and hierarchical clustering, both performed using R software (v. 2.12.2). For this analysis, mass intensity data were log transformed, peptides and arrays were normalized and mean centered. Kendall's tau coefficient was used to measure the association between peptides and arrays. Finally complete linkage clustering was applied to calculate distances between clusters.
For stringent identification of differences across samples, phosphopeptides were considered differentially phosphorylated between cell types when the Bonferroni-corrected ANOVA and Tukey Pvalues were < 0.01 and the fold difference was > 2. To correlate peptide phosphorylation with drug sensitivity, phosphopeptide intensities derived from each cell line replicate were correlated with their viability after drug treatment at either 1 μM or 10 μM relative to DMSO-treated control. The correlation between relative phosphopeptide intensity and viability was calculated using Pearson's coefficient (R) of either linear or logarithm transformed phosphorylation data.
LASSO regression analysis
Least absolute shrinkage and selection operator (Lasso) regression is a multivariate variable selection technique with a penalization approach that controls the number of regressors to be included in the optimized model. This is achieved by including a 'shrinkage' parameter λ in the cost function.
For each of the three drugs we considered a n x pmatrix X (where n = number of biological samples (21 in this study) and p = number of quantified phosphopeptides (2,135 in this study)) containing the column-wise normalized (μ = 0, δ = 1) intensities of all the phosphopeptides measured across the seven cell lines (three measurements for each cell line).
We assessed the potential of these data in predicting the level of resistance/sensitivity of the seven cell lines to three kinase inhibitors through a 'leave-one-cell-line-out' approach based on lasso linear regression. With this method, seven different models were trained for each drug, leaving out the three samples corresponding to each of the seven cell lines, in turn. Then the trained models were used to make predictions on the samples that were left out in the corresponding training phase. The predictive ability was evaluated in terms of correlation between predicted and observed percentage of surviving cells when compared to the negative control, after the drug treatment.
For a given drug D, and a cell line C left out from the training phase, let Y be the vector containing the 18 viability scores (respectively for the remaining 18 samples) and λ a non-negative number. We solved through lasso regression the problem:
where n is the number of observations (that is, the 18 samples from measurements on the remaining six cell lines, in triplicate);yi is the viability score of sample i following treatment with D; xi is the row vector containing the normalized intensities of the p phosphopeptides when measured in the i-th sample; β0 and B are a scalar and a p-vector, respectively. B contains the coefficients of the regressors (that is, all the phosphopeptides) to be optimized. As λ increases, the number of non-zero components (hence phosphopeptides with non-null coefficient in the model) decreases.
We determined the optimal value for the λ parameter with a three-fold cross-validation on the remaining 18 samples and solved equation (1) for vector B without considering the samples of the left out cell line. In order to reduce the instability of the final models across the three-fold cross-validation used to determine λ, these two final steps were repeated 20 times (for each left-out cell line) and the entries of the resulting B vector averaged across these 20 iterations, ending up in the final average model MD, C (that is, final model for drug D, leaving out the cell line C samples). The frequency of observing a non-null coefficient for each regressor across the 20 iterations (quantifying how much the corresponding phosphopeptide is stably included in the optimal models) was also computed and reported in the final results. The viability of each left-out cell line C was finally predicted through the corresponding MD, C.
In order to make the values predicted through by MD, C on the left-out samples across the seven different cell lines C and the three drugs D comparable to each other, these values were normalized (μ = 0, δ = 1) together with the predictions of MD, C on the corresponding training set. For the same reason, to produce the scatter plot in Figure 3, all the observed viability were normalized (μ = 0, δ = 1) drug-wisely.
To produce a final descriptive model MD* of response to drug D, the coefficients of all the phosphopeptides (and their non-null coefficient frequencies) were averaged across the seven corresponding MD, C.
Phosphopeptides whose average non-null coefficient frequency is > 50% in these final descriptive models are those reported in the insets of Figure 3.
Bioinformatics
Proteins containing phosphopeptides that significantly correlated with phenotypes were used for gene ontology (GO) and pathway enrichment analysis using either an in-house script that matched ontologies listed in SwissProt to each gene product or by David analysis tools. As for phosphorylation motifs analysis, polypeptide sequences were obtained from each phosphopeptide in the dataset by leaving the phosphorylated residue in the center of a sequence that was flanked by seven amino acids on each side. In cases where the phosphorylated residue in the original phosphopeptide had less than seven amino acids at either terminus, these were extended by blasting them against the SwissProt database. Phosphorylation motifs were obtained from Motif-X and from the literature to assemble a total of 108 different motifs. Because no differences between the rates at which Ser/Thr kinases phosphorylate Ser and Thr residues have been reported, no distinction was made between p-Ser and p-Thr containing motifs. Peptides phosphorylated at tyrosines were grouped in a single motif. Polypeptide sequences in the dataset were matched to these phosphorylation motifs and the average of the normalized and log-transformed intensities of all the phosphopeptides containing each of the pre-defined phosphorylation motifs were then averaged and correlated to sensitivity. A script in VBA was written to automate the implementation of these algorithms.
Western blot
AML cell lines were seeded at 5 × 105 cells/mL. Cells were harvested by centrifugation at 300 × g for 5 min, washed twice with ice cold Dulbecco's Phosphate Buffered Saline (DPBS), supplemented with 1 mM Na3VO4 and 1 mMNaF. Cell pellets were lyzed with lysis buffer (50 mMtris-HCL pH 7.4, 150 NaCL, 1 mM EDTA, 1% Triton X-100. Protein concentration was calculated using Bradford and 50 μg of protein were run in 10% SDS-PAGE. Proteins were transferred to PVDF membranes that were block with TBS-Tween (0.1%) supplemented with 5% skim milk. Then membranes were incubated o/n with primary antibody and secondary antibody for 1 h. Protein bands were detected using ECL. Primary antibodies pMARKS S153/156 (Cell Signaling: Cat.2741) and Vinculin (Cell Signaling: Cat. 4650) were used at 1:1,000 and 1:10,000 dilution, respectively. Secondary antibodies were used at 1:5,000 dilution.
Data availability
Mass spectrometry data have been deposited to the ProteomeXchange with identifier PXD000217.