ABSTRACT:
The quadrupole Orbitrap mass spectrometer (Q Exactive) made a powerful proteomics instrument available in a benchtop format. It significantly boosted the number of proteins analyzable per hour and has now evolved into a proteomics analysis workhorse for many laboratories. Here we describe the Q Exactive Plus and Q Exactive HF mass spectrometers, which feature several innovations in comparison to the original Q Exactive instrument. A low-resolution pre-filter has been implemented within the injection flatapole, preventing unwanted ions from entering deep into the system, and thereby increasing its robustness. A new segmented quadrupole, with higher fidelity of isolation efficiency over a wide range of isolation windows, provides an almost 2-fold improvement of transmission at narrow isolation widths. Additionally, the Q Exactive HF has a compact Orbitrap analyzer, leading to higher field strength and almost doubling the resolution at the same transient times. With its very fast isolation and fragmentation capabilities, the instrument achieves overall cycle times of 1 s for a top 15 to 20 higher energy collisional dissociation method. We demonstrate the identification of 5000 proteins in standard 90-min gradients of tryptic digests of mammalian cell lysate, an increase of over 40% for detected peptides and over 20% for detected proteins. Additionally, we tested the instrument on peptide phosphorylation enriched samples, for which an improvement of up to 60% class I sites was observed.
METHODS:
EXPERIMENTAL PROCEDURES
Construction of the Q Exactive Plus
The instrument is based on the previous-generation Q Exactive mass spectrometer with the same general design elements. Briefly, these consist of an atmospheric pressure ion source, a stacked-ring ion guide (S-lens) and an injection flatapole in the source region, a bent flatapole containing a large bore at the bend ejecting solvent droplets and other neutral species to prevent them from entering further into the instrument, a segmented quadrupole mass filter, a C-trap, a higher energy collisional dissociation cell, and an Orbitrap mass analyzer (Fig. 1). In contrast to the previous generation, the injection flatapole was equipped with ion selection capabilities, providing a low-resolution selection mechanism for the removal of undesirable ions from the ion beam before higher resolution selection in the quadrupole mass filter. The new, segmented quadrupole mass filter has improved ion transmission and mass selection characteristics (see below). Lastly, the instrument can optionally be equipped with a compact Orbitrap analyzer (Q Exactive HF), leading to a higher field and consequently higher frequency of ion motion. This in turn leads to almost twice the resolution in the same scan time relative to the previous cell. Alternatively, this analyzer can be used to achieve twice the scan speed while remaining at nearly the same resolution, a strategy we utilize here.
The covered mass range in the Orbitrap analyzer is m/z 50–6000. Precursor mass selection by the quadrupole is possible up to m/z 2500, and isolation windows can be set between 0.4 and 5600 Th. The instrument software automatically adjusts the required ion injection time to compensate for loss of transmission when reducing the isolation width. Acquisition speed with the classic Orbitrap analyzer remains the same as previously reported, whereas for the high-field Orbitrap it ranges from 27 Hz for resolving power 15,000 specified at m/z 200 (corresponding to 10,000 at m/z 400) to 1.5 Hz for resolving power 240,000 at m/z 200 (corresponding to 170,000 at m/z 400). The vacuum in the Orbitrap compartment can be electronically adjusted ∼5-fold, enabling high-resolution analysis of most analytes including large peptides and small proteins.
Preparation of HeLa Lysates
HeLa cells (ATCC, S3 subclone) were cultured in DMEM containing 10% fetal bovine serum, 20 mm glutamine, and 1% penicillin-streptomycin. Cells were collected via centrifugation at 200g for 10 min, washed once with cold PBS, and centrifuged again. Supernatant was carefully discarded, and cell pellets were shock frozen in liquid nitrogen and stored at −80 °C. Aliquots of ∼3e7 cells were re-suspended in 1 ml of water; then 1 ul of trifluoroethanol was added, and samples underwent incubation for 10 min on ice, a 2-min sonication at duty cycle 30% and output control 3 (Branson, Danbury; sonifier model 250), and 1 min of vortexing. After 20 min of incubation at 56 °C, 25 μl of 200 mm DTT was added to reduce proteins, and samples were incubated at 90 °C for 15 min. Alkylation was then performed by adding 100 μl of 200 mm iodoacetamide and incubating for 60 min at room temperature in the dark. The sample was diluted using 8 ml of 50 mm NH4HCO3 to reduce the final trifluoroethanol concentration to 10% (v/v), after which the sample was digested for 1 h at 37 °C by LysC at an enzyme:protein ratio of 1:100 and then overnight at 37 °C after the addition of trypsin at a ratio of 1:100. Digests were then diluted 1:4 with 0.1% formic acid (v/v) and purified with Sep-Pak tC18 cartridges according to the manufacturer's instructions. The peptide concentration was determined using a NanoDrop spectrophotometer (Thermo Scientific).
Phosphorylation Enrichment of Non-stimulated HeLa Cells
Peptides were collected from a population of 1e8 unstimulated HeLa cells prepared using the filter-aided sample preparation method. In brief, cell pellets were solubilized in 4% SDS, 100 mm Tris/HCl, pH 7.6, 0.1 m DTT; incubated at 95 °C for 5 min; and sonicated at duty cycle 30% and output control 3 (Branson Ultrasonics). The protein concentration was determined from tryptophan fluorescence emission at 350 nm using an excitation wavelength of 295 nm. A total of 30 mg of protein extract was then split on top of five 30,000 molecular weight cutoff centrifugal filters (20 mg per filter), spun down, and washed twice with 7 ml of 8 m urea, 100 mm Tris/HCl, pH 8.5. Alkylation was performed with 50 mm iodoacetamide for 30 min at room temperature in the dark in the same buffer. After two further washes with 7 ml of 8 m urea, Tris/HCl, pH 8.5, in 0.1 m and three with 7 ml of NH4HCO3, digestion was performed by adding LysC at an enzyme:protein ratio of 1:50 and incubating overnight at 30 °C. The digested peptides were eluted from the filters via centrifugation, quantified with a NanoDrop spectrophotometer, and then further digested by trypsin added at a ratio of 1:100. After incubation at 37 °C for 5 h, peptides were shock frozen in liquid nitrogen and lyophilized. Peptides (around 10 mg per Falcon tube) were re-suspended in 10 ml of ACN 80%, TFA 6%, and insoluble peptides were spun down by centrifugation at 100g for 1 min. Supernatants were moved into new 15-ml Falcon tubes, and samples were incubated twice with 50 mg of TiO2 beads on a rotating wheel for 45 min. TiO2 beads from all the enrichments were then pooled together and washed three times with 12 ml of ACN 80%, TFA 6% and three times with 12 ml of ACN 80%, TFA 0.1%. Beads were then re-suspended in 2 ml of ACN 80%, TFA 0.1%, transferred into 12 Empore-C8 StageTips, and washed once with ACN 80%, TFA 0.1%. Peptides were eluted from each StageTip with 200 μl of 60% NH4OH (25% NH3 solution in H2O) in 40% ACN. The volume was reduced via SpeedVac to 10 μl to eliminate ACN and brought back up to 200 μl with 0.1% formic acid. Phosphorylation enriched peptides were pooled and purified with Sep-Pak tC18 cartridges according to the manufacturer's instructions. The peptide concentration was determined using a NanoDrop spectrophotometer. The final concentration was brought to 400 ng/μl with 0.1% formic acid, and 5.5-μl aliquots were frozen at −20 °C.
LC-MS/MS Analysis
Online chromatography was performed with the Thermo Easy nLC ultra-high-pressure HPLC system (Thermo Fisher Scientific) coupled online to either an original Q Exactive or a Q Exactive HF with a NanoFlex source (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Analytical columns (50 cm long, 75-μm inner diameter) were packed in-house with ReproSil-Pur C18 AQ 1.9-μm reversed phase resin (Dr. Maisch GmbH, Ammerbuch-Entringen, Germany) in buffer A (0.5% acetic acid). During on-line analysis the analytical column was placed in a column heater (Sonation GmbH, Biberach, Germany) regulated to a temperature of 55 °C. A peptide mixture of 2 μg dry weight was loaded onto the analytical column with buffer A at a maximum back-pressure of 980 bar (generally resulting in a flow rate of 450 nL/min) and separated with a linear gradient of 5% to 30% buffer B (80% ACN and 0.5% acetic acid) at a flow rate of 250 nL/min controlled by IntelliFlow technology over 90 min (generally at a back-pressure of around 500 bar). Due to the loading, lead-in, and washing steps, the total time for an LC-MS/MS run was about 40 to 50 min longer. Online quality control, including automated detection of large droplet formation, HPLC parameters, and acquisition-related computer status, was performed with SprayQc.
MS data were acquired using a data-dependent top-10 method for the Q Exactive and a top-15 method for the Q Exactive HF, dynamically choosing the most abundant not-yet-sequenced precursor ions from the survey scans (300–1650 Th). Sequencing was performed via higher energy collisional dissociation fragmentation with a target value of 1e5 ions determined with predictive automatic gain control (supplemental Fig. S6). Isolation of precursors was performed with a window of 3 Th for the Q Exactive and 1.4 Th for the Q Exactive HF, because of the latter's superior quadrupole (Fig. 3C). Survey scans were acquired at a resolution of 70,000 at m/z 200 on the Q Exactive and 60,000 at m/z 200 on the Q Exactive HF (“Results and Discussion”). Resolution for HCD spectra was set to 17,500 at m/z 200 with a maximum ion injection time of 120 ms on the Q Exactive and 15,000 at m/z 200 with maximum ion injection time of 25 ms on the Q Exactive HF (supplemental Fig. S3). The normalized collision energy was 25 for the Q Exactive and 27 for the Q Exactive HF (supplemental Fig. S2; this difference was due to different scaling functions in the instrument software). The “underfill ratio,” specifying the minimum percentage of the target ion value likely to be reached at the maximum fill time, was defined as 10% (supplemental Fig. S5). Furthermore, the S-lens RF level was set at 60, which gave optimal transmission of the m/z region occupied by the peptides from our digest (supplemental Fig. S4). We excluded precursor ions with single, unassigned, or six and higher charge states from fragmentation selection (supplemental Fig. S2).
In the comparison between the Q Exactive and the Q Exactive HF, we noticed that there was a 1.5-times overestimation of the number of ions offered for fragmentation on the Q Exactive HF relative to the Q Exactive runs. To determine whether this had an additional effect on the performance of the instrument, we investigated performance on different target values. From this we found that the original Q Exactive target value of 1e5 ions remained optimal for the Q Exactive Plus and Q Exactive HF (supplemental Fig. S6).
Data Analysis
All data were analyzed with the MaxQuant proteomics data analysis workflow, version 1.4.0.6, with the Andromeda search engine. The false discovery rate was set at 1% for protein, peptide spectrum match, and site decoy fraction levels. Peptides were required to have a minimum length of seven amino acids and a maximum mass of 4600 Da. MaxQuant was used to score fragmentation scans for identification based on a search with an allowed mass deviation of the precursor ion of up to 4.5 ppm after time-dependent mass calibration. The allowed fragment mass deviation was 20 ppm. Fragmentation spectra were searched by Andromeda in the International Protein Index human database (version 3.68; 87,061 entries) combined with 262 common contaminants. Enzyme specificity was set as C-terminal to arginine and lysine, also allowing cleavage at proline bonds and a maximum of two missed cleavages. We set carbamidomethylation of cysteine as a fixed modification and N-terminal protein acetylation and oxidation (M) as variable modifications for the HeLa total cell lysates; additionally, Phospho (STY) was set as a variable modification for the phosphorylation enriched samples. Further downstream analysis of the results was performed with in-house-developed tools for the extraction of metadata from the mass spectrometry files based on MSFileReader (Thermo Fisher Scientific) and with the R scripting and statistical environment using ggplot for data visualization. The datasets used for analysis have been deposited at the ProteomeXchange Consortium via the PRIDE partner repository.