ABSTRACT:
Background
Muscle ageing contributes to both loss of functional autonomy and increased morbidity. Muscle atrophy accelerates after 50 years of age, but the mechanisms involved are complex and likely result from the alteration of a variety of interrelated functions. In order to better understand the molecular mechanisms underlying muscle chronological ageing in human, we have undertaken a top-down differential proteomic approach to identify novel biomarkers after the fifth decade of age.
Results
Muscle samples were compared between adult (56 years) and old (78 years) post-menopausal women. In addition to total muscle extracts, low-ionic strength extracts were investigated to remove high abundance myofibrillar proteins and improve the detection of low abundance proteins. Two-dimensional gel electrophoreses with overlapping IPGs were used to improve the separation of muscle proteins. Overall, 1919 protein spots were matched between all individuals, 95 were differentially expressed and identified by mass spectrometry, and they corresponded to 67 different proteins. Our results suggested important modifications in cytosolic, mitochondrial and lipid energy metabolism, which may relate to dysfunctions in old muscle force generation. A fraction of the differentially expressed proteins were linked to the sarcomere and cytoskeleton (myosin light-chains, troponin T, ankyrin repeat domain-containing protein-2, vinculin, four and a half LIM domain protein-3), which may account for alterations in contractile properties. In line with muscle contraction, we also identified proteins related to calcium signal transduction (calsequestrin-1, sarcalumenin, myozenin-1, annexins). Muscle ageing was further characterized by the differential regulation of several proteins implicated in cytoprotection (catalase, peroxiredoxins), ion homeostasis (carbonic anhydrases, selenium-binding protein 1) and detoxification (aldo-keto reductases, aldehyde dehydrogenases). Notably, many of the differentially expressed proteins were central for proteostasis, including heat shock proteins and proteins involved in proteolysis (valosin-containing protein, proteasome subunit beta type-4, mitochondrial elongation factor-Tu).
Conclusions
This study describes the most extensive proteomic analysis of muscle ageing in humans, and identified 34 new potential biomarkers. None of them were previously recognized as differentially expressed in old muscles, and each may represent a novel starting point to elucidate the mechanisms of muscle chronological ageing in humans.
METHODS:
Methods
Subjects
Subjects were admitted to the Leiden University Medical Center (Leiden, The Netherlands) and Rijnland Hospital (Leiderdorp, The Netherlands) between June 2010 and September 2012. Exclusion criteria consisted of previous knee or hip surgery (with the exception of arthroscopy), rheumatoid disease, diabetes mellitus, use of oral corticosteroids, and metastasized malignancy. Twenty four post-menopausal women undergoing elective hip surgery for hip arthrosis were selected in the present study and divided in two groups: adult women aged 56.4 ± 1.3 years (n = 11; age range 48–61 years) and old women aged 78.3 ± 0.5 years (n = 13; age range 76–82 years). We limited our study to post-menopausal women in order to avoid potential side effects of the menstrual hormone cycle. The study was approved by the medical ethical committees (P10.060 - HEALTH-2007-2.4.5-10: Understanding and combating age related muscle weakness “MYOAGE”) of the Leiden University Medical Center and Rijnland Hospital, and was performed in accordance with the principles of the revised Declaration of Helsinki. Written informed consent was obtained from all patients. The adult subjects were more active than elderly, but not involved in any specific training program. The activity score, based on self-report in a questionnaire, was significantly higher for adult than for old women (P <0.035). Adult women were cycling more than old women (83% and 36%, respectively), and adult women used less walking aid than old women (33% vs. 71%). The adult and old groups presented similar body weight (69.0 + 12.9 kg and 75.5 + 12.5 kg, respectively), height (168 + 8 cm and 166 + 7 cm, respectively) and body mass index. Muscle samples were obtained by surgical biopsy from the vastus lateralis muscle and were immediately frozen in liquid nitrogen and stored at −80°C until used.
Reagents
Acrylamide, bisacrylamide and Hybond™-P membrane were purchased from Amersham Bioscience/GE Healthcare (Little Chalfont, UK). IPG buffers, 18 cm ReadyStrip IPG strips (pH 5–8), 18 cm ReadyStrip IPG strips (pH 3.0-5.6), 18 cm ReadyStrip IPG strips (pH 5.3-6.5), and Electrode Wicks were from Bio-Rad Laboratories (Marnes la Coquette, France), and orthophosphoric acid, ammonium sulphate and absolute ethanol were from VWR (Strasbourg, France). All other chemicals were from Sigma (L’Isle-d’Abeau Chesnes, France). Sequence grade-modified trypsin was purchased from Promega (Charbonnières-les-bains, France), and Luminata™ Western Horseradish peroxidase (HRP) substrate and ReBlot Plus Strong antibody stripping solution were from Millipore (Molsheim, France). For immunoblotting, the monoclonal antibodies against VCL and FHL3 were from Sigma. The anti-mouse IgG-HRP, anti-rabbit IgG-HRP, anti-SRL and anti-β-actin (ACTB) were from Santa-Cruz biotechnology (Heidelberg, Germany). The polyclonal antibodies against GPD1, MYOZ1, ANXA1, ANXA5, GSTO1, HSPB5, HSPC3, ALDH2, NDUFS2, UQCRFS1, ENO3, HSPA1A and VCP were purchased from Euromedex (Genetex, Souffelweyersheim, France).
Protein extraction
Total muscle extracts and LIS extracts were prepared for each subject, and each individual was assessed separately. For total muscle extracts, biopsies of vastus lateralis muscle were from twelve post-menopausal women divided in two groups: adult control (n = 5) and aged (n = 7). Muscle aliquots were homogenized (40 mg/ml) in a solubilisation buffer containing 8.3 M urea, 2 M thiourea, 2% (w/v) CHAPS, 1% (v/v) dithiothreitol, and 2% (v/v) IPG buffer pH 3–10 using a TissueRuptor (Qiagen, Courtaboeuf, France), shaken for 30 min on ice and centrifuged for 30 min at 10,000 X g. The supernatants were aliquoted and stored at −20°C until analysis. Protein concentration, determined using the Bradford assay system (Bio-Rad), was 7.2 ± 1.1 mg/ml and 5.5 ± 1.2 mg/ml for the adult and old group, respectively.
LIS extracts were prepared from muscle biopsies of twelve post-menopausal women, either adult (n = 6) or aged (n = 6), according to Sayd et al.. Briefly, frozen muscle was homogenized using a TissueRuptor in 40 mM Tris (pH 7.0), 2 mM EDTA, and protease inhibitor cocktail (Sigma). After centrifugation at 4°C for 10 min at 10,000 X g, the supernatant, referred to as LIS extract, was stored at −80°C. Protein concentration was 9.3 ± 2.2 mg/ml and 9.4 ± 1.6 mg/ml for the adult and old group, respectively.
Two-dimensional gel electrophoresis
For total muscle extracts, 700 μg protein were separated per gel using IPG strips of three different pH ranges (pH 3.0-5.6, pH 5.3-6.5 and pH 5–8) for each individual. For isoelectrofocusing, samples were diluted with rehydration buffer containing 8.3 M urea, 1 M thiourea, 2% (w/v) CHAPS, 0.28% (v/v) dithiothreitol, 2% (v/v) IPG buffer (pH 3–10), and 0.01% (w/v) Coomassie Brilliant blue R-250. The IPG strips were passively rehydrated with 330 μl of this solution for 16 h under mineral oil in the PROTEAN IEF Cell system (Bio-Rad) at 20°C, and actively rehydrated using Electrode Wicks loaded onto IPG strips for 6 h at 50 V. During active rehydration, Electrode Wicks were changed every 2 h. Isolectrofocusing was then performed at 0.05 mA per IPG strip at 50 V for 2 h, 200 V for 1 h, 500 V for 1 h, 1000 V for 2 h, 8000 V for 6 h and finally 8000 V to achieve 46,000 Vh.
For LIS extracts, gels were made in triplicate for each individual and 700 μg protein was analyzed per gel. The IPG strips (pH 5–8) were passively and actively rehydrated as described above and isolectrofocusing was performed at 0.05 mA per IPG strip at 50 V for 1 h, 250 V for 1 h, 500 V for 1 h, 1000 V for 2 h, 1000 V for 1 h, 8000 V for 7 h and finally 8000 V to achieve 60,000 Vh.
The strips were then equilibrated twice for 15 min with gentle shaking in equilibration buffer containing 6 M urea, 50 mM Tris–HCl buffer (pH 8.8), 30% (v/v) glycerol, 2% (w/v) SDS. DTT (1% w/v) was added to the first, and iodoacetamide (5% w/v) to the second equilibration buffer. Separation of proteins, according to molecular weight, was carried out using a Protean Plus DodecaCell system (Bio-Rad) on homogenous 20 cm polyacrylamide gels (11% T, 2.6% C). The equilibrated strips were sealed to the top of the horizontal gel with agarose and subjected to 50 V for 1 h followed by 9 mA per gel until the blue dye reached the bottom of the gel.
Visualization of proteins and image analysis
2DGE were fixed overnight in a solution containing 30% (v/v) ethanol and 2% (v/v) orthophosphoric acid, washed twice for 30 min in 2% (v/v) orthophosphoric acid and then transferred to a solution containing 18% (v/v) ethanol, 2% (v/v) orthophosphoric acid and 15% (v/v) ammonium sulphate for 30 min. The gels were stained for 72 h with 0.06% (w/v) Coomassie Blue G-250 added to this last solution. Gels were scanned using the ImageScanner and LabScan-v.5 software (Amersham Bioscience) and protein spots were analyzed and matched between all gels using Progenesis SameSpot software (Non Linear Dynamics, Newcastle upon Tyne, UK). Age effect was evaluated for normalized volumes of 2DGE spots using an unpaired Student’s t test procedure with significance set at P <0.05. The numbers of biological replicates (5–7) that we used in the present study is similar to those used in previous investigations. Throughout the manuscript, we qualified the differential spots as “potential” biomarkers, being aware that any list of candidate identified in a discovery stage must be validated in other large and independent cohort of subjects.
Protein identification by mass spectrometry
Proteins with significant changed abundance were picked for tryptic digestion from gels. Excised protein spots from 2DGE were destained with 25 mM ammonium bicarbonate, 5% (v/v) acetonitrile for 30 min and twice in 25 mM ammonium bicarbonate, 50% (v/v) acetonitrile for 30 min each. Protein spots were then dehydrated using 100% acetonitrile for 10 min and dried in a vacuum SpeedVac. Proteins were digested overnight at 37°C using 12.5 ng/μl of sequence grade-modified trypsin (Promega) in 25 mM ammonium bicarbonate. Peptide extraction was optimised by adding 100% acetonitrile, followed by 15 min of sonication.
After concentration in the SpeedVac, the peptides mixtures were analyzed by nano-LC-MS/MS using an Ultimate 3000 system (Dionex, Voisins le Bretonneux, France) coupled to an LTQ-Velos mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Bremen, Germany). Eight microliters of each peptide sample were loaded on a C18 pre-column (300-μm inner diameter × 5 mm; Dionex) at 20 μl/min in 5% acetonitrile, 0.05% trifluoroacetic acid. After 6 min of desalting, the pre-column was switched on line with the analytical C18 column (75-μm inner diameter × 15 cm; PepMap C18, Dionex) equilibrated in 96% solvent A (0.5% formic acid) and 4% solvent B (80% acetonitrile, 0.5% formic acid). Peptides were eluted using a 4-50% gradient of solvent B during 30 min at a 300 nl/min flow rate. The eluate was electrosprayed into the mass spectrometer through a nano-electrospray ion source. The LTQ-Velos was operated in a CID top 10 mode (1 full scan MS and the 10 major peaks in the full scan are selected for MS/MS). The Mascot Daemon software (version 2.3.2; Matrix Science, London, UK) was used to perform database searches, using the Thermo Proteome Discoverer v1.3 with default parameters to generate peak lists.
For protein identification, the UniP Human database (2012/11, 86675 seq) was used. Peptide mass tolerance was set to 1.5 Da and fragment mass tolerance was set to 0.8 Da. Two missed cleavages were allowed, and variable modifications were methionine oxidation and carbamidomethylation of cysteine. Identification results were imported and filtered by Proteome Discoverer. Protein identification was validated when at least three unique peptides originating from one protein showed significant identification Mascot scores (P <0.05) with False Discovery Rate (FDR < 5%) automatically calculated by Proteome Discoverer. When redundancy occurs, Proteome Discover uses principles of parsimony to give unambiguous identification of an isoform of a protein. This was not possible for only 2 spots (LIS spots 1210 and 755), for which we indicate the two isoforms in Table 2. In the present study we considered that proteins validated for the entire number of spots analysed were really present on the basis of Mascot score, percentage of sequence coverage of the entire protein, peptide spectrum matches, unique peptides related to each protein isoform/member, and MW agreements. The mass spectrometry proteomics data have been deposited to the ProteomeXchange Consortium via the PRIDE partner repository with the dataset identifier PXD001527.
Immunoblotting
For Western-Blot analysis, total protein extracts were resolved by sodium dodecyl sulfate polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis, electrotransferred to Hybon™-P membrane and probed with anti-VCL, anti-FHL3, anti-SRL, anti-MYOZ1, anti-ANXA1, anti-ANXA5, anti-GSTO1, anti-ENO3, anti-GPD1, anti-UQCRFS1, anti-NDUFS2, anti-ALDH2, anti-HSPB5, anti-HSPA1A, anti-HSPC3, or anti-VCP. Primary antibodies were resolved with corresponding horseradish peroxidase-linked goat anti-mouse or anti-rabbit secondary antibodies, and immunoreactive proteins were detected using enhanced chemiluminescence and a Charge Coupled Device camera (GBOX, Syngene, Cambridge, UK). Each blot was dehybridized using 1X ReBlot Plus Strong antibody stripping solution and probed with anti-ACTB for normalization. To determine the significance of ageing, a Student’s t test was used with significance set at P <0.05; results are expressed as the mean ± standard deviation.
Functional correlation and pathway analysis
Pathway analysis was performed using the Search Tool for the Retrieval of INteracting Genes (String) 9.0 database (http://string-db.org). String analysis options were based on ‘evidence’ mode, we did not add or remove any protein partners, and we used clustering by K means to reveal sub-grouping within the network.