ABSTRACT:
Genetic variation modulates protein expression through both transcriptional and post-transcriptional mechanisms. To characterize the consequences of natural genetic diversity on the proteome, here we combine a multiplexed, mass spectrometry-based method for protein quantification with an emerging outbred mouse model containing extensive genetic variation from eight inbred founder strains. By measuring genome-wide transcript and protein expression in livers from 192 Diversity outbred mice, we identify 2,866 protein quantitative trait loci (pQTL) with twice as many local as distant genetic variants. These data support distinct transcriptional and post-transcriptional models underlying the observed pQTL effects. Using a sensitive approach to mediation analysis, we often identified a second protein or transcript as the causal mediator of distant pQTL. Our analysis reveals an extensive network of direct protein–protein interactions. Finally, we show that local genotype can provide accurate predictions of protein abundance in an independent cohort of collaborative cross mice.
METHODS:
Methods
The sample size (192 animals) was calculated based on previous experimental RNA-seq data and was determined to be sufficient to detect genetics effects that explain 10% or more genetic variation with 90% power and 10−6 type I error rate. Randomization was used to assign mice to treatments and samples to batches, bar codes, and TMT tags in both the RNA-seq and proteomics experiments. Data collection was carried out by automation, and as such there was no need for blinding the sample identifiers.
Animals and genotyping: DO mice
Diversity Outbred mice (DO, stock no. 009376) were obtained from The Jackson Laboratory (JAX) at 3 weeks of age, housed at JAX, and fed either standard rodent chow (6% fat by weight, LabDiet 5K52; LabDiet, Scott Distributing) or a high-fat diet (44.6% kcal fat and 34% kcal sucrose by weight, TD.08811, Harlan Laboratories) from wean age throughout the study. In total, 192 DO mice were analysed in the current study, including 50 females and 48 males raised on standard chow, and 48 females and 46 males raised on the high fat diet. At 26 weeks of age, animals were euthanized, dissected, and liver samples were sent for RNA-seq analysis at JAX (samples stored in RNAlater solution; Life Technologies) and proteomics analysis at Harvard Medical School (HMS; samples sent as snap frozen tissue).
Animals and genotyping: founder strain and CC mice
Two male and two female mice from each of the eight DO/CC founder inbred strains and four (3 males and 3 females) CC recombinant inbred strains (CC strains CC 001, CC 003, CC 004, and CC 017) were obtained from and housed at JAX, raised on the standard chow diet. Founder strain mice were euthanized at 26 weeks of age, and the CC mice were euthanized at 8–16 weeks of age. Liver samples were dissected from each mouse, snap frozen and sent to HMS for proteomics analysis. All procedures on mice were approved by the Animal Care and Use Committee at JAX.
Multiplexed quantitative proteomic analysis of mouse livers: sample preparation and TMT labelling
A total of 192 DO mouse livers (~50 mg), 32 founder strains livers (8 founders strains, 2 male and 2 female replicates for each strain) and 24 CC strain livers (4 strains, 3 male and 3 female replicates for each strain) were homogenized in 1 ml lysis buffer (1% SDS, 50 mM Tris, pH 8.8 and Roche complete protease inhibitors). Samples were reduced with 5 mM dithiothreitol for 30 min at 37 °C followed by alkylation with 15 mM for 30 min at room temperature in the dark. The alkylation reaction was quenched by adding 5 mM dithiothreitol for 15 min at room temperature in the dark. A 500 µl aliquot was then methanol/chloroform precipitated. The samples were allowed to air dry before being resuspended in 1 ml of 8 M urea and 50 mM Tris, pH 8.8. The urea concentration was diluted down to ~1.5 M urea with 50 mM Tris. Proteins were quantified using a BCA assay. Protein was then digested using a combination of Lys-C/trypsin at an enzyme-to-protein ratio of 1:100. First, protein was digested overnight with Lys-C followed by 6-h digestion with trypsin all at 37 °C. Samples were then acidified using formic acid to approximately pH 3. Samples were then desalted using a SepPak column. Eluents were then dried using a vacuum centrifuge. Peptide pellets were resuspended in 110 µl of 200 mM HEPES buffer, pH 8, and peptides were quantified by a BCA assay. Approximately 70 µg of peptides (100 µl of sample + 30 µl of 100% acetonitrile) were then labelled with 15 µl of 20 µg µl−1 of the corresponding TMT 10-plex reagent (DO or founder strains) or TMT 8-plex reagent (CC strains) for 2 h at room temperature. The reaction was quenched using 8 µl of 5% hydroxylamine for 15 min. Peptides were then acidified using 150 µl of 1% formic acid, each set of 10 samples were mixed and desalted using a SepPak column. In total, 25 TMT 10-plex reactions and 3 8-plex reactions were performed (21 DO mice, 4 founder strains and 3 CC strains). The full labelling schemes for the DO mice, the founder strains and CC strains are provided as supplementary tables (Supplementary Tables 1, 3 and 7).
Basic reverse-phase fractionation
Each of the 28 TMT experiments was separated by basic, reversed-phase chromatography. Samples were loaded onto an Agilent 300 Extend C18 column (5 µm particles, 4.6 mm ID and 220 mm in length). Using an Agilent 1100 quaternary pump equipped with a degasser and a photodiode array detector (set at 220- and 280-nm wavelength), peptides were separated using a 50 min linear gradient from 18% to 40% acetonitrile in 10 mM ammonium bicarbonate, pH 8, at a flow rate of 0.8 ml min−1. Peptides were separated into a total of 96 fractions that were consolidated into 24. Samples were subsequently acidified with 1% formic acid and vacuum centrifuged to near dryness. Each fraction was desalted via StageTip, dried via vacuum centrifugation, and reconstituted in 1% formic acid for liquid chromatography tandem mass spectrometry (LC–MS/MS) processing.
Liquid chromatography electrospray ionization tandem mass spectrometry (LC–ESI-MS/MS)
Peptides from every odd fraction (12 fractions total) from basic reverse-phase fractionation were analysed using an Orbitrap Fusion Tribrid mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific) equipped with a Proxeon ultra high pressure liquid chromatography unit. Peptide mixtures were separated on a 100 µm ID microcapillary column packed first with ~0.5 cm of 5 µm Magic C18 resin followed by 40 cm of 1.8 µm GP-C18 resin. Peptides were separated using a 3-h gradient of 6–30% acetonitrile gradient in 0.125% formic acid with a flow rate of ~400 nl min−1. In each data collection cycle, one full MS scan (400–1,400 m/z) was acquired in the Orbitrap (1.2 × 105 resolution setting and an automatic gain control (AGC) setting of 2 × 105). The subsequent MS2–MS3 analysis was conducted with a top 10 setting or a top speed approach using a 2-s duration. The most abundant ions were selected for fragmentation by collision induced dissociation (CID). CID was performed with a collision energy of 35%, an AGC setting of 4 × 103, an isolation window of 0.5 Da, a maximum ion accumulation time of 150 ms and the rapid ion trap setting. Previously analysed precursor ions were dynamically excluded for 40 s.
During the MS3 analyses for TMT quantification, precursors were isolated using a 2.5-Da m/z window and fragmented by 35% CID in the ion trap. Multiple fragment ions (SPS ions) were co-selected and further fragmented by HCD. Precursor ion selection was based on the previous MS2 scan and the MS2–MS3 was conducting using sequential precursor selection (SPS) methodology. HCD used for the MS3 was performed using 55% collision energy and reporter ions were detected using the Orbitrap with a resolution setting of 60,000, an AGC setting of 50,000 and a maximum ion accumulation time of 150 ms.
Database searching and reporter ion quantification
Software tools were used to convert mass spectrometric data from raw file to the mzxml format. Erroneous charge state and monoisotopic m/z values were corrected as per previous publication. MS/MS spectra assignments were made with the Sequest algorithm using an indexed Ensembl database (mouse: Mus_musculus NCBIM37.61). Databases were prepared with forward and reversed sequences concatenated according to the target-decoy strategy. All searches were performed using a static modification for cysteine alkylation (57.0215 Da) and TMT on the peptide N termini and lysines. Methionine oxidation (15.9949 Da) was considered a dynamic modification. Mass spectra were searched with trypsin specificity using a precursor ion tolerance of 10 p.p.m. and a fragment ion tolerance of 0.8 Da. Sequest matches were filtered by linear discriminant analysis as described previously, first to a data set level error of 1% at the peptide level based on matches to reversed sequences. Peptide probabilities were then multiplied to create protein rankings and the data set was again filtered to a final data set level error of 1% false discovery rate (FDR) at the protein level. The final peptide-level FDR fell well below 1% (~0.2% peptide level). Peptides were then assigned to protein matches using a reductionist model, where all peptides were explained using the least number of proteins.
Peptide quantitation using TMT reporter ions was accomplished as previously published. In brief, a 0.003 Da m/z window centred on the theoretical m/z value of each reporter ion was monitored for each of the 8–10 reporter ions, and the intensity of the signal closest to the theoretical m/z value was recorded. TMT signals were also corrected for isotope impurities based on the manufacturer’s instructions. Peptides were only considered quantifiable if the total signal-to-noise for all channels was >200 and an isolation specificity of >0.75. Within each TMT experiment, peptide quantitation was normalized by summing the values across each channel and then each channel was corrected so that each channel had the same summed value. Protein quantitation was performed by summing the signal-to-noise for all peptides for a given protein. Protein quantitative measurements were then scaled to 100 (equal expression across all channels would be a value of 10). Normalization across each of the 10plex experiments was then performed using quantile normalization.
Statistical analyses
Principal component analysis was performed using Cluster 3.0 (ref.). Hierarchical clustering, K-means clustering and ANOVA were performed using Multi experiment Viewer. Analysis on the founder strains proteomics data sets was performed using an ANOVA and adjusted for multiple testing using the Benjamini–Hochberg FDR procedure.
Implications of multiplexed quantitative proteomics platform
Improvements in several aspects of the analysis pipeline enabled the increase in scale. Our quantitative proteomics technology proved instrumental as it supported multiplexing with ten different mouse livers in the same analysis. Accurate expression measurements were obtained by applying a notched isolation waveform on an Orbitrap Fusion instrument. The time required to collect expression profiles from each 10-plex was 36 h or ~4 h per mouse liver of mass spectrometry analysis time. The proteome-wide analysis of 192 livers thus required 35 days. As a result of these methodology improvements, we detected tenfold more pQTL than previous MS-based reports.
Genotyping of DO and CC samples: DO samples
Genomic DNA was extracted from each DO mouse (n = 192 total samples) and genotyped at 57,973 single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) on the Mega-MUGA platform (Geneseek). A total of 177 out of 192 samples passed SNP quality control metrics. For these samples, founder haplotypes were inferred from SNP probe intensities using a hidden Markov model implemented in the DOQTL R package, and then used to interpolate a grid of 64,000 evenly-spaced genetic intervals. In addition, founder haplotypes were independently inferred from the RNA-seq data by genotyping by RNA-seq (GBRS) protocol (see next section) and interpolated to the same 64,000 interval grid.
For each sample, we verified that the haplotype reconstructions agreed between the DNA Mega-MUGA and GBRS reconstructions by calculating the Pearson correlation between each pair of samples. When a Mega-MUGA sample had a correlation below 0.4 with the same sample ID in the RNA-seq data, we assumed that this sample was mismatched. We searched the RNA-seq data for the correct match to the Mega-MUGA sample by looking for another sample that was more highly correlated. If we found an RNA-seq sample with a correlation >0.4 that was not assigned to another sample, we matched it with the Mega-MUGA sample. When a sample was removed from the Mega-MUGA data for technical reasons, we used the GBRS haplotype reconstructions (samples F326, F328, F362, F363, F368, M377, M388, M392, M393, M394, M404, M408, M411, M419 and M425).
Genotyping of DO and CC samples: CC samples
Founder haplotypes for the CC strains were downloaded from the CC strain database (csbio.unc.edu/CCstatus/gstemp/AllImageHapAndGenotypeFiles.zip) maintained at the University of North Carolina.
Transcriptome profiling and GBRS
Total liver RNA was isolated from each of the 192 DO mice and sequenced by single-end RNA-seq as previously described. We aligned raw reads against pooled transcriptomes of the eight founder strains. To construct the pooled transcriptome, we incorporated founder strain-specific SNPs and insertions/deletions (Sanger REL-1410) into the reference strain genome sequence (GRCm38/mm10) to produce strain-specific genomes. We derived transcript sequences for all annotated genes (Ensembl version 75 gene annotation) from each strain genome, and then combined the eight founder allele sequences for each transcript into one pooled transcriptome for read alignment. After alignment, we quantified expected read counts expressed from each transcript allele using an expectation maximization algorithm (EMASE, https://github.com/churchill-lab/emase). We repeated the same process for liver RNA-seq data from the eight founder strains to assess how specifically each founder read aligns back to their origin strain when exposed to all other founder alleles simultaneously in the alignment pool. We then evaluated the genotype probability of each transcript using a hidden Markov Model (HMM), where we bring those read counts together and calculate (1) how likely allele-specific read counts are generated from a specific genotype, and (2) how much those likelihoods comply within the context of neighbouring transcripts. Finally, we re-quantified total and allele-specific expression with EMASE by repeating the similar process but using individualized diploid transcriptomes reconstructed along our genotype calls.
QTL mapping of transcript and protein abundance
Quantitative proteomics combined with transcript quantitation by RNA-seq makes it possible to define the relative contributions of transcriptional versus post-transcriptional mechanisms and local versus distant effects on protein abundance. For example, a local QTL is a genetic variant near the target gene that influences its expression; it might be expected to act in cis and affect both transcript and protein levels. By contrast, distant QTL exert their effect on a target gene’s expression in trans, most likely via a causal intermediate such as another protein or RNA species. Identifying causal intermediates of distant QTL effects may reveal novel protein–protein associations and their biological consequences. Our comprehensive pQTL analysis yielded a global network of interactions that shed new light on the regulation of protein abundance.
QTL mapping
For mapping of pQTL and eQTL, we included only proteins that were present (non-0) in ≥96 samples and corresponded to gene identifiers in the RNA-seq data that were also expressed in ≥96 samples. A total of 6,707 proteins met these criteria. For pQTL mapping with the proteomics data, protein abundance values were first quantile-normalized and transformed to rank normal scores, and then pQTL were mapped with the R package DOQTL, using a linear mixed model with sex, diet and TMT tag as additive covariates and a random polygenic term to account for genetic relatedness among the DO animals. For eQTL mapping from the RNA-seq data, gene-level counts were first normalized to the upper quartile value and transformed to rank normal scores, and then eQTL were mapped with DOQTL including sex, diet and batch as additive covariates and a random polygenic term to account for relatedness. We used the 64 k genotype matrix derived from Mega-MUGA DNA genotypes as input for pQTL and eQTL mapping, with the exception of samples with missing or low quality DNA genotype results where we used GBRS-derived genotypes.
Statistical analyses
Significance thresholds were established by performing 10,000 permutations and fitting an extreme value distribution to the maximum LOD scores. Permutation derived P values were then converted to q-values with the QVALUE R package, using the bootstrap method to estimate π0 and the default λ tuning parameters. The significance threshold for declaring a QTL was set at a genome-wide significance level of P < 0.1 (FDR = 10%).
eQTL replication analysis
To detect a pQTL and eQTL requires a strong statistical signal to exceed stringent genome-wide significance thresholds. We considered the possibility that lack of concordance between distant pQTL and eQTL could be explained by low power, especially for the distant pQTL. The proteomics data in this study were obtained on a subset (discovery set) of DO mice from an earlier study. We created a replication set for the eQTL by random sampling of 192 additional DO samples. As expected, the likelihood of replicating an eQTL depended on the significance of the QTL in the discovery set (Supplementary Fig. 4a). Local eQTL tend to be more significant and replicated well across experiments (76% replication, n = 2,448), while distant eQTL replicated poorly (5% replication, n = 52; Supplementary Fig. 4a). The distribution of LOD scores is similar for distant pQTL and distant eQTL (Supplementary Fig. 4b), suggesting that we had similar low power to detect distant pQTL as distant eQTL. While the overlap between distant pQTL and eQTL is lower than what we had expected (<1%, n = 9; Supplementary Fig. 4c), it is still difficult to rule out low rate of detection as a possible explanation. We provide additional evidence that distant pQTL act through post-transcriptional mechanisms.
Model selection by BIC
For each of the 6,707 proteins in the discovery set with detectable transcript and protein abundance, we identified (1) the locus within ±10 Mb of the gene midpoint with the highest LOD score (local), and (2) the locus on a separate chromosome with the highest LOD score (distant), regardless of their statistical significance. Next, for each local and distant locus, we considered all possible relationships among locus genotype, transcript abundance, and protein abundance. We computed the BIC score for each of eight possible models. For each protein, we recorded the optimal local and distant locus model (that is, model that yields the lowest BIC score). In addition, we calculated the Bayesian posterior probability (assuming a uniform prior over relationships), and from these posterior probabilities estimated the expected number of proteins for each model.
Mediation analysis to identify distant regulators and co-regulated proteins
For proteins with distant pQTL, mediation analysis was used to identify proteins and transcripts in that region that were likely to be the causal mediator of the QTL. Mediation analysis in this context is adapted from the general approach outlined previously to differentiate moderator from mediator variables in social psychology research. We implemented our method as the function ‘intermediate’ for the open statistical language R. In brief, for a given distant pQTL, we first identified all expressed proteins and transcripts within 10 Mb of the peak SNP—these genes are candidate mediators of the distant pQTL. We then included the protein abundance of each candidate individually as an additive covariate in the pQTL mapping model and re-ran the regression at the peak distant SNP. We performed the same analysis with transcript abundance as the additive covariate. Our expectation was that many distant pQTL would be mediated by the protein and/or transcript abundance of a gene in that locus. For distant pQTL where this is true, including the abundance of the mediator protein/transcript in the pQTL mapping model should significantly decrease or abolish the distant pQTL effect—as evidenced by a decrease in LOD score. We calculate LOD scores using the ‘double-lod-diff ’ method in r/intermediate to minimize the effects of missing data in the proteomics and RNA-seq data sets.
Statistical analysis
To assess the significance of the LOD drop for a given candidate mediator on a given distant pQTL, a null distribution of LOD scores was estimated by re-running the regression at the peak SNP and including all expressed proteins and transcripts outside of the candidate regions as additive covariates. In total, this yields mediation LOD scores for 8,050 proteins and 21,454 transcripts for each distant pQTL. Mediation LOD scores are then scaled to z-scores, and any candidate with a conservative z-score ≤ −6 is recorded as a potential causal mediator. Further, any protein/transcript outside of the pQTL window with a z-score ≤ −6 is recorded as a potential co-regulated partner of the target protein. We examined 1,130 distant pQTL and identified at least one candidate protein or transcript mediator for 743. In total, we found 618 unique protein/transcript mediators, of which 534 regulated a single protein, 61 regulated two proteins, and 23 regulated three or more proteins. Furthermore, 84% of the top candidate protein mediators were themselves driven by a local pQTL.
Analysis of distant pQTL for transcriptional modes of regulation
We observed that a small subset of local pQTL and nearly all distant pQTL lacked corresponding eQTL. For these proteins, transcript and protein abundance appeared to be largely uncoupled (buffered). For the minority of local pQTL lacking corresponding local eQTL, we expected that mutations altering protein stabilization but not affecting transcript abundance conferred this effect. The paucity of distant pQTL with corresponding eQTL is especially puzzling given our initial expectation that trans effects on protein abundance would likely stem from transcription factors or chromatin modifying proteins. We detected few transcription factors and fewer transcription factor pQTL in our protein data set (n = 132 expressed out of 2,243 annotated transcription factors; n = 21 out of 132 transcription factors with pQTL; n = 9 local transcription factor pQTL, n = 12 distant transcription factor pQTL), suggesting (as others have noted) that their regulation is more evolutionarily constrained and less tolerant of genetic variation, or alternatively, that the effects of any individual polymorphism in a transcription factor may be buffered by other transcriptional components. Results from recent large population genetics data sets support the former explanation, and consequently distant effects from transcription factors may resist detection by genetic mapping methods and account for the lack of distant pQTL that affect both transcript and protein abundance
Assembly and clustering of the distant pQTL regulatory network
We assembled the distant pQTL regulatory network by drawing directed edges to connect each trans-pQTL with its primary target protein. Each target protein was then connected to co-regulated proteins via directed edges. For purposes of graph assembly, each distant pQTL was represented by the protein most likely to be responsible for the effects of the QTL as indicated by mediation analysis. To identify clusters of co-regulated proteins, the directed network was converted to undirected form and subjected to MCL clustering using an inflation parameter of 1.5. Each cluster was then evaluated for enrichment of PFAM domains, subcellular localizations, or GO categories using a hypergeometric test with subsequent multiple testing correction. P < 0.05 after multiple testing correction was considered indicative of enrichment.
Mapping distant pQTL and co-regulated proteins onto the BioPlex protein interaction network
To quantify the extent to which direct physical interactions could explain distant pQTL regulation, each distant pQTL and its regulated proteins were associated with their human homologues using official gene symbols and mapped to the BioPlex network of human protein interactions. Any protein that could not be mapped to the BioPlex network, either because a human homologue was not known or because the protein did not occur in the network, was excluded. Physical interactions connecting the pQTL and its co-regulated proteins were counted and compared against the maximum number of pairwise connections to calculate the density of physical interactions. A binomial model was used to identify sets with unusually high numbers of interactions assuming the probability of an interaction occurring between two randomly selected proteins in the BioPlex network was 9.42 × 10−4 (the BioPlex graph density). P values were adjusted for multiple hypothesis testing using the method of Benjamini–Hochberg and those smaller than 0.05 after correction were taken to be significant.
Extended Data