ABSTRACT:
The objective of this study was to identify blood-based protein biomarkers of early stage Mycobacterium tuberculosis (Mtb) infection. We utilized plasma and serum specimens from TB patients and their contacts (age ≥ 12) enrolled in a household contact study in Uganda. In the discovery phase cross-sectional samples from 104 HIV-uninfected persons classified as either active TB, latent Mtb infection (LTBI), tuberculin skin test (TST) converters, or persistent TST-negative were analyzed. Two hundred eighty-nine statistically significant (false discovery rate corrected p < 0.05) differentially expressed proteins were identified across all comparisons. Proteins associated with cellular immunity and lipid metabolism were induced early after Mtb infection. One hundred and fifty-nine proteins were selected for a targeted mass spectrometry assay. A set of longitudinal samples from 52 TST-negative subjects who converted to TST-positive or remained TST-negative were analyzed, and multivariate logistic regression was used to identify unique protein panels able to predict TST conversion with cross-validated AUC > 0.85. Panel performance was confirmed with an independent validation set of longitudinal samples from 16 subjects. These candidate protein biomarkers may allow for the identification of recently Mtb infected individuals at highest risk for developing active TB and most likely to benefit from preventive therapy.
Highlights
Changes in host proteins can be detected in M. tuberculosis infection, even prior to tuberculin skin test conversion.
Early M. tuberculosis infection provoked host responses related to inflammation, immune-response, and lipid metabolism.
Protein panels were able to predict tuberculin skin test conversion and development of latent M. tuberculosis infection.
Developing a diagnostic test that identifies recent M. tuberculosis infection would allow for targeted treatment of those persons most likely to progress to active tuberculosis (TB). Current tests for M. tuberculosis infection are unable to differentiate between latent M. tuberculosis infection (LTBI) and active TB, nor distinguish recent from remote infection. This study identified human host proteins capable of predicting tuberculin skin test conversion, and the development of LTBI. These candidate protein biomarkers may allow for the identification of recently Mtb infected individuals who are at highest risk for developing active TB and would most benefit from preventive therapy.
METHODS:
Materials and Methods
Study Design and Subjects
Participants for this study were enrolled between 2002 and 2012 in the Kawempe Community Health Study (KCHS), a prospective cohort of adult pulmonary TB index cases and their household contacts. Kawempe is located in Kampala, Uganda, which is a high-burden country with an annual TB incidence of approximately 202 TB cases per 100,000 population. Index cases were defined as adults (age 18 years and older) with initial episodes of newly diagnosed culture-positive pulmonary TB. A household contact was defined as a person living within the same building as an index case for at least one week during the three-month period immediately preceding the diagnosis of TB in the index case. Contacts included in this sub-study were age 12 years and older. TST was performed by Mantoux method with 5 TU of purified protein derivative (PPD). After the initial evaluation, participants were evaluated at 1, 3, 6, 12, and 24 months for active TB and with repeat TST at months 3, 6, 12, and 24 if their first and subsequent TST remained negative. Converters were defined as household contacts, with an initial TST < 10 mm at baseline visit, who subsequently converted their skin test to positive (TST ≥ 10 mm and an increment of 6 mm) during follow-up testing. Subjects that remained TST-negative and did not convert their TST were considered to be persistently not infected (NI). All subjects with a positive TST (at baseline or conversion during follow-up) were offered treatment with isoniazid preventive therapy (IPT) (10–20 mg/kg or a maximum dose of 300 mg/day) for 9 months. All subjects included in this sub-study were HIV negative. The study was approved by the responsible institutional review boards in Uganda and the U.S and all participants provided written informed consent.
Sample Processing
Sera and plasma were aliquoted and stored at − 80 °C until testing. Samples were grouped into blocks containing each of the clinical groups (active TB, LTBI, converters, and NI) and the order of the samples within each block was randomized. Samples were depleted of abundant proteins using an HSA/IgG column (Agilent Technologies, Mississauga, ON) in tandem with an IgY14 and Supermix (Sigma, Oakville, Ontario) column and the flow through was digested with trypsin (Promega, Madison, WI) at a trypsin to protein ratio of 1:10. The digested samples were freeze-dried, resolubilized, and treated with TCEP [tris(2-carboxyethyl)phosphine] to reduce disulfide bonds. Samples were desalted by solid phase extraction using a 3M Empore C18 desalting plate and distributed into 96-well plates and vacuum evaporated. Peptides were stored at − 20 °C until use. Sample processing variability was measured using aliquots of pooled plasma that were inserted at regular intervals among the study samples and taken through the entire analysis. For the Discovery study the process quality control sample CV was 20.45%, and for Verification study 1 and 2 the CVs were 10.99% and 4.3%, respectively.
Tandem Mass Spectrometry Analysis
Samples were resuspended in 92.5/7.5 water/ACN + 0.2% formic acid and analyzed by LC-MS (nanoAcquity UPLC and Q Exactive mass spectrometer). Peptide separation was achieved using a Waters nanoAcquity Symmetry UPLC Trap column (180 μm × 20 mm, 5 μm particle size) and a Waters nanoAcquity UPLC BEH130 analytical column (150 μm × 100 mm, 1.7 μm particle size). The mobile phases were (A) 0.2% formic acid in water and (B) 0.2% formic acid in acetonitrile. For each sample approximately 2.5 μg was loaded onto the analytical column. Peptides were separated using a 52.5 min gradient (92.5% A to 40% A) at a flow rate of 1.8 μL/min. MS spectra were acquired from 400 to 1800 Da. The MS method consisted of a Full MS scan followed by a dd-MS2 scan of the top 12 ions. The Full MS scan was achieved at a resolution of 70,000 with an AGC value of 3e6 and a maximum IT of 30 ms. The dd-MS2 scan was performed at a resolution of 17,500 with an AGC target value of 5e4 and a maximum IT of 60 ms.
Components, defined as ions that have been identified by their mass/charge ratios, retention times, and intensities but do not yet have sequence information, were detected and matched across all samples using the Elucidator software version 3.3 (Rosetta Biosoftware, Seattle, WA). Presence of unusual modifications was determined using Preview Software (Protein Metrics). Fragmentation patterns were matched to the corresponding sequences found in a combined database containing Human (reviewed entries only) downloaded on 20,121,206 from Uniprot, using Mascot software version 2.2.06 (Matrix Science, Boston, MA). The following parameters were used for the searches: enzyme = trypsin, allowed missed cleavages = 2, peptide tolerance = 20 ppm, MS/MS tolerance = 0.4 Da, variable modifications = Deamidation (N, Q), Oxidation (M), Acetaldehyde (N-term). A decoy reverse database was used to evaluate false positive error rate. Peptide/Protein Teller helped derive the simplest list of proteins to explain observed peptides, at a FDR of 5%. All intensities were log (base e) transformed. 42,654 peptides, whose intensities reached LOD (= 50,000) in at least 15 samples, were included in subsequent analyses. The overall intensity bias was corrected so that, between each pair of samples, the median of the difference of the peptide intensities (in log scale) of the two samples over all the peptides was 0, or close to. For batch-effect correction, a one-way ANOVA model Iij = M + Di + εij (I: intensity, M: overall interception, and D: batch–factor) was solved and parameters Di (i = 1…5) under the constraint of Σi = 110 (Ni ∗ Di) = 0 were obtained; the Di's were then subtracted from the normalized intensities to form the ‘batch-effect corrected’ intensities. Intensities below an intensity threshold (IT), IT = 50,000, were transformed to avoid spurious large fold changes as follows: I ➔ (I + IT) / 2 (i.e. intensity in the range of (0, IT) was linearly mapped to the range of (IT/2, IT)). ANOVA analysis was then applied to identify differentially expressed peptides. ANOVA model: Iij = M + Ti + εij where I is peptide intensity, M is overall average intensity, t is ‘condition’ factor, and ε random error. False detection rate and q-value were calculated based on the p-values obtained from the ANOVA using Storey's method to make multiple testing adjustments (implemented in MATLAB). ‘Post hoc’ contrast analyses were conducted using Tukey's hsd method to calculate p-values for each pair wise comparison. A protein level analysis was then applied by introducing a ‘peptide factor’ in the ANOVA used above: Iijk = M + Ti + Pj + εijk where I is protein intensity, M overall constant, T ‘condition’, and P peptide factor. The number of the levels for P is protein-dependent, equal to the number of peptides for the protein. Proteins were considered to be differentially expressed if they met the following thresholds: p- and q-values < 0.05 and differential intensity (DI) > 1.1-fold change (or < 0.9 for decrease).
Multiple Reaction Monitoring Mass Spectrometry
The MRM experiments were done as described previously. Three hundred ninety-two (392) peptides representing 163 host proteins were synthesized (JPT Peptide Technologies, Berlin, Germany) and resolubilized in 25/75 DMSO/water (v/v), pooled and diluted with water + 0.2% formic acid to a concentration of 200 pmol/mL. This peptide mix was used to develop the MRM assay on a nanoAcquity UPLC (Waters) coupled to a QTRAP 5500 mass spectrometer (AB Sciex). Peptide separation was achieved using a BioBasic C18 column (Thermo) (320 μm × 150 mm, 5 μm particle size). The mobile phases were (A) 0.2% formic acid in water and (B) 0.2% formic acid in acetonitrile. Gradient time was 30 min and the flow rate was 10 μL/min. The optimal 2 transitions per peptide were determined using selected reaction monitoring (SRM)-triggered MS/MS on a QTRAP 5500 instrument (AB Sciex). The MRM-MS/MS method was developed by calculating, for each peptide, the precursor mass of the doubly and triply charged peptide ions and the first and second y fragment ions with a m/z greater than [m/z (precursor) + 20 Da]. If these transitions were observed during the MRM scan a full MS/MS spectrum of the precursor peptide ion was acquired. The two most intense fragment ions (b or y fragment ions only) in the MS/MS spectrum and its elution time were determined for each acquired peptide and the collision energy (CE) was optimized for all of the chosen transitions. Sample analysis utilized an MRM detection window of 140 s (± 70s around the RT of each peptide) and a cycle time of 1.5 s. The developed MRM assay was then applied for the analysis of the study samples.
Expression analysis of MRM-MS data acquired from the verification samples was performed using R version 2.14.0, platform x86_64-pc-mingw32/x64 (64-bit). An IT below which the measure is deemed less reliable was determined empirically and set to 10,000 pre-normalization. A detection rate (DR) was defined as the proportion of samples within a group with a raw intensity value greater or equal to the IT. Transitions with DR below 50% for one of the two groups being compared were excluded from expression analysis. Differential intensity (DI) ratios were calculated in pair wise comparisons for each transition as the ratio of the average normalized intensities of each group. Prior to calculating the DI ratios, all intensity values that were below IT in the raw data prior to normalization were replaced by the half-IT value. Student's t-test was applied for the expression analysis. Protein-level statistics were also computed by linearly combining the transitions of a given protein into a single variable and then applying a t-test. The average was a weighted average, where the weights were derived from the first principal component of the transition covariance matrix. The calculation of q-values was done using function “qvalue” from Storey's package “qvalue” version 1.24.0.
Network Analysis
Data were analyzed using Ingenuity Pathway Analysis (IPA; Ingenuity® Systems, Redwood City, CA). Right-tailed Fisher's exact test was used to calculate a p-value determining the probability that each biological function and/or disease assigned to that data set was due to chance alone.
Panel Selection and Receiver Operating Characteristics
The area under the curve (AUC) was the result of a nested cross-validation procedure that used stratified sampling to split the data at random into five test sets. For each test set, the remaining four fifths (4/5) of the data were defined to be that test set's corresponding training set. To facilitate the selection of panels of interest, the following procedure was carried out for all possible panels with up to four proteins out of all the candidate biomarkers. Each training set was again split at random by stratified sampling into two halves. One half was used to fit a logistic regression model, which was then used to calculate out-of-sample predictive scores for the other half. This random half-and-half split procedure was repeated a number of times equal to three times the sample size of the training set; out-of-sample predictive scores and the corresponding true outcomes were aggregated over all random splits and AUCs were estimated from these. Since there are five training sets, five such AUC estimates were generated for each panel, which were then averaged. Panel selection was carried out by examining various summaries of protein performance, and also direct examination of the panels with the best AUC estimates. We used a predetermined selection parameter of AUC > 0.85. To compute the final AUC estimates of the selected panels, each test set was scored by a logistic regression model fit to the corresponding training set; the resulting out-of-sample predictive scores and true outcomes aggregated over all five test sets, forming the final set from which AUCs were estimated.
Data Submission
Data submissions conformed to published guidelines. LCMS data are accessible at http://proteomecentral.proteomexchange.org, identifier PXD000582. MRM data are available at http://www.peptideatlas.org/passel/, identifier PASS00343 for the MRM assay qualification data on the discovery samples, PASS00344 and PASS00959 for verification 1 and 2, respectively. Expression data are accessible at http://enews.patricbrc.org/niaid-clinical-proteomics/, identifier ZDN for the discovery data, ZHH for the MRM qualification data, and ZHS for Verification 1 data.