ABSTRACT:
Background
Rheumatoid arthritis (RA) is a chronic autoinflammatory disorder that affects small joints. Despite intense efforts, there are currently no definitive markers for early diagnosis of RA and for monitoring the progression of this disease, though some of the markers like anti CCP antibodies and anti vimentin antibodies are promising. We sought to catalogue the proteins present in the synovial fluid of patients with RA. It was done with the aim of identifying newer biomarkers, if any, that might prove promising in future.
Methods
To enrich the low abundance proteins, we undertook two approaches—multiple affinity removal system (MARS14) to deplete some of the most abundant proteins and lectin affinity chromatography for enrichment of glycoproteins. The peptides were analyzed by LC–MS/MS on a high resolution Fourier transform mass spectrometer.
Results
This effort was the first total profiling of the synovial fluid proteome in RA that led to identification of 956 proteins. From the list, we identified a number of functionally significant proteins including vascular cell adhesion molecule-1, S100 proteins, AXL receptor protein tyrosine kinase, macrophage colony stimulating factor (M-CSF), programmed cell death ligand 2 (PDCD1LG2), TNF receptor 2, (TNFRSF1B) and many novel proteins including hyaluronan-binding protein 2, semaphorin 4A (SEMA4D) and osteoclast stimulating factor 1. Overall, our findings illustrate the complex and dynamic nature of RA in which multiple pathways seems to be participating actively.
Conclusions
The use of high resolution mass spectrometry thus, enabled identification of proteins which might be critical to the progression of RA.
Electronic supplementary material
The online version of this article (doi:10.1186/s12014-016-9113-1) contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.
METHODS:
Methods
Sample preparation
Blood free synovial fluid samples from 20 RA cases were collected in Na-heparin coated BD vacutainers (cat no. 367883367883). During every collection, the sample was centrifuged at 2000 rpm for 10 min and thereafter the cell free supernatant was kept at −80 °C. Sample collection was done from Fortis Hospitals, Bangalore, India and from Armed Forces Medical College, India after obtaining ethics committee clearance from the respective hospitals. Patients with RA were included who fulfilled the ACR EULAR 2010 criteria. All the patients had symmetrical polyarthritis with high acute phase reactants (ESR and/or CRP). They were all positive for either rheumatoid factor or anti Cyclic citrullinated peptide (anti CCP) or both. They had mean disease duration of 37.45 months and had active disease at time of inclusion in study. Synovial fluid was collected from the knee joint in all patients. Informed consent was obtained from all the patients. The clinical profile and demographic details are included in Additional file 1: Table S1.
Multiple lectin affinity chromatography
Glycoprotein enrichment from 20 pooled synovial fluid samples containing 2.5 mg proteins was carried out by using a mixture of three agarose-bound lectins, Wheat Germ Agglutinin, Concanavalin A and Jacalin (Vector laboratories, USA), as described previously by our group. Briefly, pooled lectin beads were incubated with protein samples in Tris-buffered saline (0.05 M Tris–HCl, pH 7.5, 0.15 M NaCl). After overnight incubation at 4 °C, the bound glycoproteins were eluted using competitive elution with a mixture of 100 mM of M-pyranoside, galactose, melibiose and N-acetyl glucoseamine in Tris-buffered saline, pH 7.5. The eluates were then washed and concentrated using 3 kDa MWCO filters (Amicon, Millipore, Ireland). The multilectin affinity approach yielded ~250 µg equivalent proteins and then stored at −20 °C until further use. These enriched proteins were then fractionated in SDS-PAGE followed by in-gel trypsin digestion.
Multiple affinity removal system (MARS) for depleting abundant proteins
MARS-14 mini spin column (Agilent Technologies, Santa Clara, USA) was used to deplete top 14 abundant proteins (albumin, IgG, antitrypsin, IgA, transferrin, haptoglobin, fibrinogen, alpha2-macroglobulin, alpha1-acid glycoprotein, IgM, apolipoprotein AI, apolipoprotein AII, complement C3, and transthyretin) from synovial fluid. Briefly, 20 µl synovial fluid was reconstituted in 140 µl of load/wash buffer (Buffer A, Agilent Technologies, Santa Clara, USA) and the loaded MARS spin column was then centrifuged at 2000 rpm for 10 min at room temperature. The flow through was collected separately and using elution buffer (Buffer B, Agilent Technologies, Santa Clara, USA), the bound high abundant proteins were eluted out. The entire protocol was followed as per the manufacturer’s instructions. A total of 5 mg equivalent protein was depleted to 250 µg, out of which 150 µg was separated on SDS-PAGE followed by in-gel trypsin digestion. Rest of 100 µg equivalent proteins was subjected to in-solution trypsin digestion followed by strong cation exchange chromatography (SCX)-based fractionation.
In-gel trypsin digestion
We carried out in gel-based trypsin digestion of each of the multilectin enriched proteins and MARS depleted proteins. SDS PAGE gels (10 %) were stained using colloidal-Commassie stain. Protein bands were excised and thereafter in-gel trypsin digestion was carried out, as described previously. Briefly, protein bands were excised and chopped into 1 mm3 pieces. The gel pieces were destained in 40 % acetonitrile in 40 mM ammonium bicarbonate. Proteins were reduced using 5 mM di-thio-threitol (DTT) followed by alkylation using 10 mM iodo-acetamide (IAA). In-gel trypsin digestion was carried out at 1:20 enzyme to protein ratio overnight at 37 °C. Peptides were extracted, desalted and kept at −20 °C till further analysis.
Strong cation exchange chromatography (SCX)
The remaining set of MARS-14 depleted proteins (~100 µg equivalent) was subjected to reduction and alkylation followed by in-solution trypsin digestion as described previously. Resulting peptides were reconstituted in SCX solvent A (10 mM KH2PO4, 25 % acetonitrile pH 2.8) and loaded on a PolySULPHOETHYL A column (PolyLC, Columbia, MD, USA) using an Agilent 1200 HPLC system containing a binary pump, UV detector and a fraction collector. Peptides were fractionated by a 50 min gradient of 8–50 % solvent B (350 mM KCl in solvent A) and fractions were collected using fraction collector. The complexity of each fraction was determined based on UV absorbance at 214 nm. The fractions were then cleaned using custom made C18 stage-tips (3 M Empore high-performance extraction disks, St. Paul, Minnesota, USA) and were then vacuum dried and kept at −20 °C until further analysis.
LC–MS/MS analysis
Peptide fractions were analysed on LTQ Orbitrap XL ETD mass spectrometer (Thermo, San Jose, CA, USA) interfaced with Eksigent nanoLC400 (AB SCIEX, CA, USA), to perform a reverse phase separation of peptides. At first, peptides were enriched on a trap column (75 µm X 2 cm, Magic-C18-AQ material 5 µm, 100 Å) with solvent A (0.1 % formic acid) at a flow rate of 4 µl/min. The peptides were then resolved with a flow rate of 350 nl/min on a 10 cm long analytical column packed with 5 µm Magic-C18-AQ material (Michrom Bioresources, Inc., Auburn, CA, USA) by a gradient of 10–60 % solvent B (90 % acetonitrile in 0.1 % formic acid) over 60 min. The MS spectra were acquired in a data dependent manner in the Orbitrap at a mass resolution of 60,000 at 400 m/z while the MS/MS spectra were acquired in a linear ion trap (LTQ) mass analyzer. Nine most abundant precursor ions from a survey scan within m/z range from 350 to 1800 with a minimum signal threshold of 1000 were isolated with a 4 Da window and fragmented by CID with 35 % normalized collision energy. Dynamic exclusion was set to 90 s with a 7 ppm mass window. Maximum ion injection times were set to 10 ms for MS and 100 ms for MS/MS. The automatic gain control targets were set to 5 × 105 for MS in the Orbitrap, 1 × 104 for MSn in the LTQ.Xcalibur (version 2.0.7) was used for data acquisition.
Data analysis
Protein identification was carried out using Mascot and Sequest search algorithms through the Proteome Discoverer software suite 1.3 (Thermo Scientific, Bremen, GmBH). Searches were carried against Human RefSeq protein database (Release 50, containing 33,249 protein entries). Trypsin was used as protease with maximum 1 missed cleavage allowed. Carbamidomethyl of Cysteine (C) was set as a static modification and protein N-terminal Acetylation, Oxidation of methionine (M) and deamidation of Asparagine (N) and glutamine (Q) were set as dynamic modifications. MS tolerance was set to 20 ppm while MS/MS tolerance was set to 0.8 Da. Subsequently, the identified peptides were filtered-based on false discovery rate (FDR) cut-off of 1 %. In addition to the full tryptic searches, we also carried out semi-tryptic searches using Mascot algorithm with all the previously mentioned modifications.
Bioinformatics analysis
Gene ontology (GO)-based analysis was performed to classify proteins based on molecular function, biological process and subcellular localizations by the use of our in-built repository, Human Protein Reference Database (HPRD) (http://hprd.org). Using an in-house generated database called the Plasma Proteome Database (PPD) (http://www.plasmaproteomedatabase.org/), a publicly available repository of plasma proteins with published evidence, we have segregated our protein list into two sets, one set comprising proteins that were already reported in plasma with literature evidence and the other set with no published evidence.