ABSTRACT:
Malignant mesothelioma is an aggressive asbestos-induced cancer, and affected patients have a median survival of approximately one year after diagnosis. It is often difficult to reach a conclusive diagnosis, and ancillary measurements of soluble biomarkers could increase diagnostic accuracy. Unfortunately, few soluble mesothelioma biomarkers are suitable for clinical application. Here we screened the effusion proteomes of mesothelioma and lung adenocarcinoma patients to identify novel soluble mesothelioma biomarkers. We performed quantitative mass-spectrometry-based proteomics using isobaric tags for quantification and used narrow-range immobilized pH gradient/high-resolution isoelectric focusing (pH 4–4.25) prior to analysis by means of nano liquid chromatography coupled to MS/MS. More than 1,300 proteins were identified in pleural effusions from patients with malignant mesothelioma (n = 6), lung adenocarcinoma (n = 6), or benign mesotheliosis (n = 7). Data are available via ProteomeXchange with identifier PXD000531. The identified proteins included a set of known mesothelioma markers and proteins that regulate hallmarks of cancer such as invasion, angiogenesis, and immune evasion, plus several new candidate proteins. Seven candidates (aldo-keto reductase 1B10, apolipoprotein C-I, galectin 1, myosin-VIIb, superoxide dismutase 2, tenascin C, and thrombospondin 1) were validated by enzyme-linked immunosorbent assays in a larger group of patients with mesothelioma (n = 37) or metastatic carcinomas (n = 25) and in effusions from patients with benign, reactive conditions (n = 16). Galectin 1 was identified as overexpressed in effusions from lung adenocarcinoma relative to mesothelioma and was validated as an excellent predictor for metastatic carcinomas against malignant mesothelioma. Galectin 1, aldo-keto reductase 1B10, and apolipoprotein C-I were all identified as potential prognostic biomarkers for malignant mesothelioma. This analysis of the effusion proteome furthers our understanding of malignant mesothelioma, identified galectin 1 as a potential diagnostic biomarker, and highlighted several possible prognostic biomarkers of this disease.
METHODS:
EXPERIMENTAL PROCEDURES
Ethics Statement
All patients included in this study provided written informed consent. The study was approved by regional ethics committees in Stockholm and at the Eskisehir Osmangazi University in Turkey.
Patients and Effusion Characteristics
Discovery Population
Pleural effusions in the discovery population were subjected to shotgun proteomics to identify biomarker candidates. Pleural drainage of effusions from patients was performed at the Chest Diseases Department of Eskisehir Osmangazi University in Eskisehir, Turkey. After collection, effusions were left for 10 min and then centrifuged at 2,000 rcf for 10 min; acellular supernatants were collected for analyses and stored without additives at −80 °C. Effusions from patients diagnosed with pleurisy were collected at the Department of Laboratory Medicine, Division of Pathology, Karolinska Institutet, Stockholm, Sweden. These seven effusions were centrifuged at 1,700 rcf for 10 min, and acellular supernatants were stored without additives at −20 °C before analyses. Effusions were analyzed from six patients with epithelioid mesothelioma, six patients with lung adenocarcinoma, and seven patients with benign pleurisy/mesotheliosis (Table I). All cancer diagnoses were verified by histology and immunohistochemistry, and all patients with benign pleurisy were alive without a malignant diagnosis three years after sample collection. No patients had a history of systemic diseases (such as diabetes, rheumatoid arthritis, or systemic lupus) or other malignancies and none had received chemotherapy prior to collection of the effusion samples. Cytology on cell pellets collected after centrifugation was used to ensure a high mesothelial cell content in the effusions from pleurisy patients.
Validation Population
Biomarker candidate proteins were validated in a set of effusions from nonconsecutive patients (all samples were collected in Eskisehir, Turkey, as described above) with malignant mesotheliomas (n = 37), pleural metastases of adenocarcinomas (n = 22), squamous carcinoma of the lung (n = 2), adenosquamous non-small cell lung cancer (n = 1), and benign reactive conditions (n = 16) (Table II). The patient group with pleural metastases included ntotal = 25.
Depletion of Abundant Proteins by the Multiple Affinity Removal System
The 14 most abundant serum proteins were removed using the Agilent Human 14 Multiple Affinity Removal System (MARS-14) column (Agilent Technologies, Inc., Santa Clara, CA) to reduce the dynamic range of the pleural effusions. The DC™ Protein Assay (Bio-Rad Laboratories, Inc.) was used to determine protein concentrations in each sample, and aliquots of each sample containing 1.6 mg of protein were depleted using the MARS-14 column coupled to an Äkta™ chromatography system (GE Healthcare) following the manufacturer's instructions. Proteins in the flow-through and retained proteins were followed using UV light absorbance (280 nm). Removal of abundant proteins was verified on NuPAGE® Novex® Bis-Tris mini gels (10%; Invitrogen) stained with Coomassie Brilliant Blue. Protein sizes were determined via comparison to a prestained protein ladder (SeeBlue®Plus2, Invitrogen).
Preprocessing of Effusion Proteins
Tryptic Digestion Using Filter-Aided Sample Preparation
All samples were individually reduced and alkylated before digestion with trypsin. In brief, samples were placed in centrifugation tubes containing Microcon YM-10 filters (10-kDa cutoff; Nanosep® Centrifugal Devices with Omega™ Membrane, 10 k). For further details, please see Ref.. Samples were centrifuged (14,000 rcf for 15 min) in urea buffer #1 (8 m urea, 1 mm dithiothreitol, 25 mm HEPES, pH 7.6). The material retained on the filter was then alkylated with urea buffer #2 (4 m urea, 55 mm iodoacetamide, 25 mm HEPES, pH 7.6) for 20 min at room temperature. Another centrifugation step preceded treatment with urea buffer #3 (4 m urea, 25 mm HEPES, pH 7.6). Two additional centrifugation steps were performed to wash the filters. All buffers were prepared fresh prior to use, and centrifugation was conducted at room temperature. Samples were trypsinized (Promega, Madison, WI) 0.25 m urea, 100 mm HEPES, pH 7.6 plus trypsin at an enzyme-to-protein ratio of 1:50) overnight at 37 °C. Finally, the filter units were centrifuged for 15 min at 14,000 rcf and then subjected to another centrifugation with Milli-Q water. The flow-through, which contained the tryptic peptides, was collected.
Isobaric Labeling for Quantification
Labeling with isobaric tags for relative and absolute quantification (iTRAQ) was performed following the manufacturer's instructions (AB Sciex, Framingham, MA). Two iTRAQ 8-plexes were used, and 100 μg of peptides from each sample were labeled with each iTRAQ tag (114–119 and 121 Da). Both iTRAQ 113 tags were mixed with 14.3 μg of peptides from all 14 samples (for a total of 200 μg of peptides); this was divided into two 100-μg aliquots for use as an internal standard to link the two 8-plexes. The pooled iTRAQ samples were cleaned using Strata-X-C columns (Phenomenex Inc., Torrance, CA) following the manufacturer's instructions. The two different iTRAQ 8-plex samples are referred to as iPool 1 and iPool 2; each pool contained peptides from three mesotheliomas, three metastatic lung adenocarcinomas, one benign pool composed of either three or four benign effusions, and the internal standard.
Isoelectric Focusing of Peptides
To reduce the sample complexity, the two iPools were fractionated by means of high-resolution isoelectric focusing (HiRIEF) on an ultra-narrow immobilized pH gradient (IPG) covering a pH range of 4–4.25 as described in Ref. (IPG-HiRIEF kindly supplied by GE Healthcare). In silico digestions of mesothelin (UniProt entry #Q13421), osteopontin (#P10451), and CA125 (#Q8WXI7) were performed to predict a suitable pH interval that would include peptides from these proteins in the range of the IPG-HiRIEF strip. For each iPool, 390 μg of peptides were diluted in 8 m urea and bromphenol blue and applied to an IPG strip (24 cm), and the strips were allowed to swell overnight. The two IPG-HiRIEFs were run for at least 100 kVh on an IPGphor-II (GE Healthcare Bio-Sciences AB) before elution with Milli-Q water three times for 45 min into 72 fractions using a prototype liquid handling robot (GE Healthcare Bio-Sciences AB). The fractions were dried in a speed vacuum centrifuge and stored at −80 °C. For further details, please see Ref..
Liquid Chromatography Electrospray Ionization LTQ-Orbitrap Analysis
Peptides were separated using an Agilent 1200 nano-LC system before analysis on the LTQ Orbitrap Velos (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Samples were trapped on a Zorbax 300SB-C18 and separated on an NTCC-360/100–5-153 (Nikkyo Technos, Ltd., Tokyo, Japan) nano-LC column at 0.4 μl/min using a 50-min linear gradient ranging from 3%–40% acetonitrile in 0.1% formic acid. The LTQ Orbitrap Velos was operated in a data-dependent manner. Five precursors were selected for sequential fragmentation by collision-induced dissociation and higher-energy collisional dissociation, and the results were analyzed by the linear ion trap and Orbitrap, respectively. The survey scan was performed in the Orbitrap at a resolution of 30,000 in the profile mode from 300–2,000 m/z, using a lock mass of m/z 445.120025, with a maximum injection time of 500 ms and the automatic gain control set to 1 × 106 ions. For the generation of higher-energy collisional dissociation fragmentation spectra, a maximum ion injection time of 500 ms and an automatic gain control of 5 × 104 were used before fragmentation at 50% normalized collision energy and 100-ms activation time. For Fourier transform MS2 spectra, a normal mass range was used, centroiding the data at a 7,500 resolution. Peptides for collision-induced dissociation were accumulated for a maximum ion injection time of 200 ms and an automatic gain control of 3 × 104, fragmented with 35% collision energy, wideband activation on, activation q 0.25, and an activation time of 10 ms before analysis at the normal scan rate and mass range in the linear ion trap. Precursors were isolated with a width of 2 m/z and put on the exclusion list for 90 s. Single and unassigned charge states were rejected from precursor selection.
Peptide and Protein Identification
Orbitrap spectra were initially mapped by SEQUEST and MASCOT against the UniProt human canonical sequence protein database (January 18, 2011; Proteome Discoverer 1.2), and the results were filtered using a 5% false discovery rate (FDR) cutoff. Later, the spectra were searched again using the SEQUEST search engine and the Percolator algorithm with Proteome Discoverer 1.3 software (Thermo Scientific) against the UniProt human canonical sequence protein database (October 7, 2011; 56,869 entries). The results were filtered using a 5% FDR cutoff. A precursor mass tolerance of 10 ppm and product mass tolerances of 0.02 Da for higher-energy collisional dissociation Fourier transform MS and 0.8 Da for collision-induced dissociation ion trap MS were used. In addition, fixed modifications included trypsin with one missed cleavage, iodoacetamide on cysteine, and iTRAQ 8-plex on lysine and the N terminus; oxidation of methionine was set as a variable modification. Quantification of the iTRAQ 8-plex reporter ions was performed using Proteome Discoverer on higher-energy collisional dissociation Fourier transform MS tandem mass spectra using an integration window tolerance of 20 ppm and median centering for each sample. Only unique peptides in the dataset were used for quantification determinations. The raw data associated with this manuscript have been deposited in the ProteomeXchange Consortium via the PRIDE partner repository with the dataset identifier PXD000531. For proteins identified with one unique peptide, annotated spectra can be viewed in supplementary File S1.
Statistical Analyses and Bioinformatics
Multivariate Analysis
Multivariate analysis was performed on proteins found in both iPool 1 and iPool 2 (i.e. overlapping proteins). Principal component analysis (PCA) and orthogonal partial least square discriminant analysis (OPLS-DA) were performed using SIMCA-P + (v.13) software (Umetrics, Umeå, Sweden). PCA was performed on unit variance-scaled and median-centered data to view the data distribution and to identify possible outliers. OPLS-DA model building is a supervised classification to determine the quantified proteins that, together, can discriminate between diseases such as mesotheliomas versus lung cancers. To refine the OPLS-DA models, proteins with low variable importance scores (<1) and proteins with nonsignificant weights (i.e. a 95% confidence interval that includes 0) were excluded in successive optimization steps. The OPLS-DA model was validated internally using 7-fold cross-validation (CV), and model validity was assessed with CV-ANOVA (with the p value indicating the probability that the model is the result of chance alone). R2Y denotes the percentage variance in Y that is explained by the model, and Q2 is the fraction of the total variation of Y that can be predicted by the model.
Univariate Analysis
Significant analysis of microarray (SAM 4.0, Stanford Tools, Stanford, CA) was used to identify deregulated proteins by assessing the fold-change and the FDR. Values were log2-transformed and median-centered for the analysis. The FDRs are presented as individual q-values. Significant analysis of microarray cannot be used for groups with fewer than five samples; therefore, the analysis was performed on only the overlapping proteins from both iPools. The primary comparison was of all mesotheliomas against all lung carcinomas. The two pools that included pleurisy patients were regarded for benign reference purpose. Different datasets were superimposed using the Web-based tool BioVenn.
Network Analyses (DAVID and Ingenuity Pathway AnalysisTM)
Selected proteins were uploaded into the DAVID database (Database for Annotation, Visualization and Integrated Discovery) to evaluate possible associations with known pathways. DAVID utilizes data from other databases, such as KEGG and BioCarta, to determine a protein group's involvement in biological processes.
Deregulated proteins (fold-change of ≥1.5 or ≤1.5) from the overlap of the iPools were entered into the Ingenuity Pathway Analysis software (Ingenuity Systems, Qiagen, Hilden, Germany), a network-building and pathway annotation tool. Ingenuity Pathway Analysis employs Fisher's exact test to calculate the probability that chance alone explains the overlap of identified proteins and canonical pathways. Associations with a p value < 0.05 were considered statistically significant.
Validation of Biomarker Candidates in an Extended Patient Group
Candidate Selection
Proteins with high fold-changes and q-values of 0% were automatically considered prime biomarker candidates. A second selection accepted higher q-values, and the emphasis was on proteins that were selected by the OPLS-DA models or that seemed to be biologically relevant to mesothelioma or cancer. “Suggested biological relevance” was defined as top-scoring proteins involved in known pathways (as determined in the Ingenuity Pathway Analysis and DAVID databases) or that seemed relevant based on evidence in the scientific literature.
Enzyme-linked Immunosorbent Assay
A subset of selected candidate biomarkers were validated in a larger set of patient effusions using commercial enzyme-linked immunosorbent assays (ELISAs). Manufacturer information and the sample dilution factors are listed in supplementary Table S1.
Comparison of Groups Using One-way ANOVA
The three sample groups (mesothelioma, metastatic carcinomas, and benign conditions) were compared using the nonparametric Kruskal–Wallis test, with comparisons between groups performed using Dunn's post hoc test to obtain multiplicity-adjusted p values. Analyses were performed and figures were generated using GraphPad Prism software (v. 5.04, GraphPad Software Inc., La Jolla, CA).
Receiver Operator Characteristics
The true positive rate (sensitivity) was plotted against the false positive rate (100% − specificity), and the AUC values are reported with the 95% confidence interval as an estimate of diagnostic usefulness. The curves were created and the analyses were performed using GraphPad Prism software. These analyses were performed on all patients in the validation population. Differences between receiver operator characteristics were calculated using the StAR Web-based application. This method uses the nonparametric Mann–Whitney U-statistic to compare distributions and the AUC when computed by the trapezoidal rule. Patient expression levels from two reference biomarkers, hyaluronan and N-ERC/mesothelin, were extracted from an earlier study.
Survival Analysis
Survival analysis was performed for patients in the validation population. The Web-based threshold selection tool Cutoff Finder was used to condition a threshold for each biomarker based on its most significant hazard ratio. The Kaplan–Meier estimator was used to evaluate possible prognostic information. The log-rank (Mantel–Cox) test was performed to compare survival curves and to estimate hazard ratios. Analyses were performed and graphs were created using GraphPad Prism software.