ABSTRACT:
Introduction
Cardiac myosin binding protein-C (cMyBP-C) becomes dephosphorylated in the failing heart and reduced phosphorylation-dependent regulation of cMyBP-C has been implicated in contractile dysfunction. To date, several phosphorylation sites have been identified for human cMyBP-C; however, a comprehensive characterization of the cMyBP-C phosphoproteome is lacking. This study aimed to characterize the cMyBP-C phosphoproteome using two different proteomic-based methods in explanted donor and end-stage failing hearts.
Methods
The first approach used to characterize the cMyBP-C phosphoproteome employed a strong-cation exchange chromatography (SCX) fractionation method (10 pooled samples, technical replicates = 4) and the second employed a sodium dodecylsulfate polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis method (n = 10; technical replicates = 2). Each subsequently underwent titanium dioxide (TiO2) affinity chromatography to enrich for the tryptic phosphopeptides, which were analyzed using an LTQ-Orbitrap mass spectrometer. Moreover, recombinant C0-C2 fragment of mouse cMyBP-C incubated with PKA, PKC, CaMKII and CK2 was analyzed to identify the kinases involved with phosphorylation of cMyBP-C.
Results
Seventeen phosphorylation sites on cMyBP-C were identified in vivo, with the majority localized in the N-terminal domains C0-C2. The three most abundant phosphorylated sites, Ser284, Ser286 and Thr290, are located in the regulatory M-domain of cMyBP-C. Ser284 showed a significant reduction in phosphorylation in HF.
Conclusion
This study demonstrates that cMyBP-C harbours more phosphorylation sites than previously known, with a total of 17 (9 novel) identified phosphorylation sites in vivo. Most sites were primarily located within the N-terminal side of the protein. The most highly phosphorylated site on cMyBP-C was Ser284 and this site showed decreased phosphorylation in the failing heart, which implicate importance for fine-tuning contractility. To date, the functional importance of Ser286 and Thr290 is unknown. In addition, 16 sites were identified after in vitro kinase incubation. The data have been deposited to the ProteomeXchange with identifier PXD000158
METHODS:
2. Methods
Tissue was used from explanted donor and end-stage HF hearts from patients with idiopathic dilated cardiomyopathy (IDCM). All tissues used in this study were obtained after informed consent and with approval of the local Ethical Committees (Human Research Ethics approval from St. Vincent's Hospital (H03/118) and from The University of Sydney (#7326). Overall cMyBP-C phosphorylation levels in explanted donor (n=8) and end-stage failing hearts (n=8) (and dephosphorylated sample as negative control) untreated and treated with PKA were analyzed using phos-tag acrylamide gels (FMS Laboratory; Hiroshima University, Japan).
A comprehensive analysis of the cMyBP-C phosphoproteome was performed using SCX-fractionation and SDS-PAGE gel electrophoresis fractionation of cMyBP-C. The SCX-based method (10 pooled samples, technical replicates = 4) provided high coverage of the cMyBP-C phosphoproteome, but required large protein amounts, whereas the SDS-PAGE method (n = 10; technical replicates = 2) allowed us to quantify the most abundant sites but provided low coverage of the cMyBP-C phosphoproteome. TiO2 was used to enrich for phosphopeptides for both methods. All enriched tryptic peptides were analyzed by LC-MS/MS on an Agilent 1200 nano-LC system in front of an LTQ-Orbitrap mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific). Each MS1 scan was followed by collision induced dissociation (CID, acquired in the LTQ) of the 5 most abundant precursor ions. Only MS1 signals exceeding 1000 counts triggered the MS2 scans. Raw MS/MS data were batch searched against the Human IPI database version 3.79 using the Sorcerer 2™-SEQUEST® algorithm (Sage-N Research, Milpitas, CA, USA). Data were further analyzed using Scaffold PTM version 1.1.2. The data is available in Pride (http://www.ebi.ac.uk/pride/) through accession number 24805 (Reviewer account: Username = review78541, Password = aNz2Rwf8).
Recombinant mouse cMyBP-C fragment C0-C2 (2 μg) was incubated with 200U protein kinase A (PKA), 2000U Calcium calmodulin kinase II (CaMKII), 1000U Casein kinase 2 (CK2) or 0.2U of protein kinase C (PKC) for 3hrs at 30°C. Protein was digested using trypsin and peptides were analyzed in triplicate on an EASY-nLC 1000 connected to an Orbitrap Elite (Thermo) equipped with a nanoelectrospray ion source. Database searching and processing was performed as described above using the mouse IPI database version 3.80.
A detailed expanded methods description is available in the online data supplement.