ABSTRACT:
Although protein acetylation is widely observed, it has been associated with few specific regulatory functions making it poorly understood. To interrogate its functionality, we analyzed the acetylome in Escherichia coli knockout mutants of cobB, the only known sirtuin-like deacetylase, and patZ, the best-known protein acetyltransferase. For four growth conditions, more than 2,000 unique acetylated peptides, belonging to 809 proteins, were identified and differentially quantified. Nearly 65% of these proteins are related to metabolism. The global activity of CobB contributes to the deacetylation of a large number of substrates and has a major impact on physiology. Apart from the regulation of acetyl-CoA synthetase, we found that CobB-controlled acetylation of isocitrate lyase contributes to the fine-tuning of the glyoxylate shunt. Acetylation of the transcription factor RcsB prevents DNA binding, activating flagella biosynthesis and motility, and increases acid stress susceptibility. Surprisingly, deletion of patZ increased acetylation in acetate cultures, which suggests that it regulates the levels of acetylating agents. The results presented offer new insights into functional roles of protein acetylation in metabolic fitness and global cell regulation.
METHODS:
Materials and Methods
Escherichia coli strains and culture conditions
Escherichia coli wild-type BW25113 and its knockout strains (Supplementary Table S9) were grown in minimal media in batch mode with glucose and acetate as described in Castaño-Cerezo et al and in glucose-limited chemostat at a dilution rate of 0.2 h (Nanchen et al,; Renilla et al,).
Proteomics
Sample preparation for lysine acetylation mapping
Cells were harvested at exponential and stationary phase in glucose cultures, exponential phase in acetate cultures and in steady state in glucose-limited chemostats. Cell pellets were washed three times with PBS and then resuspended in lysis buffer containing 8 M urea, 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate and 1 tablet of complete mini EDTA-free cocktail (Roche, Boehringer Mannheim) and supplemented with 10 mM nicotinamide and 10 μM trichostatin in order to inhibit deacetylases. Cells were sonicated on ice for three cycles (20 s each) with a probe of 3 mm of diameter in a Vibra Cell VC 375 ultrasonic processor (Sonics Materials, Danbury, CT). The lysate was clarified by centrifugation for 20 min at 20,000 × g at 4°C.
Three mg of protein of each condition and strain were reduced with 2 mM dithiothreitol for 30 min at 56°C and alkylated with 4 mM iodoacetamide during 20 min in the dark, followed by LysC (1:75) digestion during 4 h at 37°C. Samples were diluted fourfold in 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate buffer and digested with trypsin (Promega, Madison, WI) (1:100) during 16 h at 37°C.
For quantitative analysis of peptide lysine acetylation, stable isotope dimethyl labeling was used as described in Boersema et al. Labeled peptides from each strain were mixed in a 1:1:1 proportion. Acetylated peptides were immunoprecipitated as described (Choudhary et al,). Nine milligrams of peptides was resuspended in immunoprecipitation buffer (50 mM MOPS, 10 mM sodium phosphate and 50 mM NaCl pH 7.4). The peptide solution was mixed with 100 μl of anti-acetyl-lysine antibody beads (ImmuneChem, Burnaby, Canada) and incubated for 16 h at 4°C. Beads were washed four times with immunoprecipitation buffer, twice with water and eluted with 0.1% trifluoroacetic acid. Lysine-acetylated peptides were desalted using C18 StageTips.
MS specifications
Samples were resuspended in 10% formic acid (FA)/5% DMSO, and 40% of the sample was analyzed using a Proxeon Easy-nLC100 (Thermo Scientific) connected to an Orbitrap Q-Exactive mass spectrometer. Samples were first trapped (Dr Maisch Reprosil C18, 3 μm, 2 cm × 100 μm) before being separated on an analytical column (Agilent Zorbax SB-C18, 1.8 μm, 40 cm × 75 μm), using a gradient of 60 min at a column flow of 150 nl/min. Trapping was performed at 8 μl/min for 10 min in solvent A (0.1 M acetic acid in water), and the gradient was as follows: 7–30% solvent B (0.1 M acetic acid in acetonitrile) in 91 min, 30–100% in 3 min, 100% solvent B for 2 min and 7% solvent A for 18 min. Nanospray was performed at 1.7 kV using a fused silica capillary that was pulled in-house and coated with gold (o.d. 360 μm; i.d. 20 μm; tip i.d. 10 μm). The mass spectrometers were used in a data-dependent mode, which automatically switched between MS and MS/MS. Full-scan MS spectra from m/z 350 to 1,500 were acquired at a resolution of 35,000 at m/z 400 after the accumulation to a target value of 3 × 106. Up to ten most intense precursor ions were selected for fragmentation. HCD fragmentation was performed at normalized collision energy of 25% after the accumulation to a target value of 5 × 104. MS2 was acquired at a resolution of 17,500, and dynamic exclusion was enabled (exclusion size list 500, exclusion duration 30 s).
Data analysis
Raw data were analyzed by MaxQuant (version 1.3.0.5) (Cox & Mann,). Andromeda (Cox et al,) was used to search the MS/MS data against the Uniprot E. coli MG1655 database (version v2012-09, 4,431 sequences), including a list of common contaminants and concatenated with the reversed version of all sequences. Trypsin/P was chosen as cleavage specificity allowing three missed cleavages. Carbamidomethylation (C) was set as a fixed modification, while Oxidation (M), Acetyl (Protein N-term) and Acetyl (K) were used as variable modifications. For dimethyl labeling, DimethylLys0 and DimethylNter0 were set as light labels, DimethylLys4 and DimethylNter4 were set as medium labels, and DimethylLys8 and DimethylNter8 were set as heavy labels. All peptides were used for quantification studies, but to find significantly acetylated peptides (Fig 2), only those found in two or more replicates and with a FDR < 0.05 were used (t-test adjusted for multiple testing using permutation-based FDR). The database searches were performed using a peptide tolerance of 20 ppm for the first search and 6 ppm for the main search. HCD fragment ion tolerance was set to 20 ppm. Data filtering was carried out using the following parameters: Peptide false discovery rate (FDR) was set to 1%; Andromeda score was set to 30; max peptide PEP was set to 1; minimum peptide length was set to 5; minimum razor peptides were set to 1; peptides used for protein quantification was set to razor and unique peptides; protein quantification was performed by using only unmodified peptides and Oxidation (M) and Acetyl (Protein N-term); and the re-quantify option was enabled. Further data processing was performed using the Perseus tool (version 1.3.0.4) available in the MaxQuant environment.
Lysine acetylation motif was created using the IceLogo software package. For the generation of the acetylation motif, all acetylated peptides with an Acetyl (K) Probability higher than 0.9 and a cutoff P < 0.01 were used.
In vitro enzyme activities
Acetyl-CoA synthetase (Acs), isocitrate dehydrogenase (Icd), isocitrate lyase (AceA) and phosphotransacetylase (Pta) were assayed as previously described (Castaño-Cerezo et al,) and acetate kinase as described by Foster and collaborators with minor modifications (Foster et al, 1974).
DNA microarray
Global gene expression was assessed in glucose exponential phase and chemostat cultures. RNA was purified using Vantage RNA purification kit (Origene, MD, USA). Purity and concentration of isolated RNA were assessed in a NanoDrop® ND-1000 spectrophotometer (NanoDrop Technologies, Wilmington DE). Quality was evaluated by microfluidic capillary electrophoresis on an Agilent 2100 Bioanalyzer (Agilent Technologies, Palo Alto, CA) using Agilent RNA 6000 Pico kit. GeneChip E. coli Genome 2.0 arrays (Affymetrix, Santa Clara, CA) were prepared and loaded according to the manufacturer's instructions. Signal extraction and normalization was performed using GeneChip Expression Console, and RMA algorithm was applied (Smyth,). Log2 signals were loaded into Babelomics, and Class Comparison analysis were performed using Limma method (FDR 0.05) (Medina et al,). Hierarchical clustering and matrix annotation were performed using Perseus (Cox & Mann,).
Protein purification and in vitro deacetylation assays
Protein purification
The acetyl-CoA synthetase (Acs), isocitrate lyase (AceA) and the NAD+-dependent deacetylase (sirtuin) CobB from E. coli BW25113 were expressed using ASKA clone plasmids (GFP−) (Kitagawa et al,). In order to obtain hyper-acetylated proteins, plasmids were transformed into E. coli BL21 ΔcobB or K12 ΔcobB for protein expression. The transformants were grown for 14 h at 28°C with 0.1 mM of IPTG induction. Cells were harvested by centrifugation and washed three times with 0.9% NaCl and 10 mM MgSO4. Cell pellets were resuspended in binding buffer (15.5 mM Na2HPO4, 4.5 mM NaH2PO4, 500 mM NaCl and 20 mM imidazole, pH 7.4) and lysed by sonication (3 × 30″ cycles) on ice. Cell debris was removed by centrifugation, and protein extract was loaded onto His GraviTrap columns (GE healthcare, Buckinghamshire, UK). His-tagged proteins were purified according to the manufacturer protocol. Purified proteins containing imidazole were cleaned using Amicon ultra 4 centrifugal filters (Millipore, Country Cork, Ireland).
In vitro protein deacetylation assays
For deacetylation assays, 100 μg of protein (Acs or AceA) was incubated with CobB (5 μg for Acs and 50 μg for AceA deacetylation assays, respectively) in deacetylation buffer (50 mM HEPES, 5 mM NAD+, 1 mM DTT and 5% glycerol, pH 7.0) during 1 h at 37°C with NAD+ (5 mM) as substrate.
After incubation, aliquots of the reaction were used for enzyme activity assays, Western blotting or mass spectrometry for lysine acetylation mapping (Supplementary Materials and Methods).
Metabolic flux ratio analysis and 13C-constrained metabolic flux analysis
Metabolic flux ratio analysis in E. coli BW25113 and its knockout mutants ΔcobB, ΔpatZ, ΔcobBΔaceK and ΔpatZΔaceK in glucose batch exponential phase and chemostat cultures (D = 0.2 h−1) was performed as previously described (Zamboni et al,). One milligram of cells was washed twice with 1 ml of 0.9% NaCl and 10 mM MgSO4 and hydrolyzed in 300 μl 6 M HCl at 105°C for 15 h in sealed 1.5-ml tubes. The hydrolysates were dried in a heating block at 85°C under a stream of air and then derivatized at 85°C for 60 min in 30 μl of dimethylformamide and 30 μl of N-(tert-butyldimethylsilyl)-N-methyl-trifluoroacetamide with 1% (v/v) tert-butyldimethylchlorosilane with slight shaking (Zamboni et al,). One microliter of the derivatized sample was injected into a 6,890 N Network GC system, combined with a 5,975 Inert XL Mass Selective Detector (Agilent Technologies). The gas chromatography–mass spectrometry-derived mass isotope distributions of proteinogenic amino acids were corrected for naturally occurring isotopes (Fischer & Sauer, ), and nine ratios of fluxes through converging reactions were determined. Calculations were performed using the Matlab®-based software FiatFlux 1.66 (Zamboni et al,).
Intracellular net carbon fluxes were estimated by using the stoichiometric model previously described (Zamboni et al,) that included all major pathways of central carbon metabolism, including the glyoxylate shunt and the Entner–Doudoroff (ED) pathway. The matrix consisted of 25 reactions and 21 metabolites. Net fluxes were then calculated using: (i) the stoichiometric reaction matrix, (ii) the relative metabolic flux ratios, (iii) physiological data, and (iv) precursor requirements for biomass synthesis. Specifically, the following flux ratios were used: serine derived through the EMP pathway, pyruvate derived through the ED pathway, oxaloacetate (OAA) originating from PEP, PEP originating from OAA, OAA originating from glyoxylate, the lower and upper bounds of pyruvate originating from malate and the upper bound of PEP derived through the PP pathway.
Molecular biology
The rcsB and cobB genes were PCR-amplified from E. coli BW25113 genomic DNA and cloned into the pBAD24 plasmid (Guzman et al,). Single amino acid mutants K153R, K153Q and K153E (for rcsB gene) and H110Y (for cobB gene) were obtained by site-directed mutagenesis. The Stratagene kit for mutagenesis was used according to the manufacturer instructions. Mutagenesis primers are listed in Supplementary Table S10.
Electron microscopy for flagella observation
Escherichia coli strains were grown in glycerol minimal medium. The cells were harvested at mid-exponential phase and fixed with 3% glutaraldehyde. After three washes with PBS, each cell suspension was placed on electron microscopy grids and stained for 15 s with 2% uranyl acetate before flagella examination in a JEM-1011 Electron Microscope (Jeol, Tokyo, Japan) operating at 90 kV.
Mobility assays
All strains were grown until mid-exponential phase. Five microliter of these cultures was inoculated into semisolid agar (10 g/l tryptone, 5 g/l NaCl and 0.25% agar). Plates were checked for mobility after 16-h incubation at 30°C.
Acid stress resistance test
All tested strains were grown overnight in glycerol minimal medium (pH 5.5) supplemented with 1.5 mM glutamic acid. A 1:1,000 dilution of the overnight culture was inoculated in glycerol minimal medium pH 2.5 supplemented with 1.5 mM glutamic acid. Cell survival was measured after 2 h in acidic media as previously described (Krin et al,).
Glutamate decarboxylase activity (GAD)
For Gad enzyme activity determination, approximately 3 × 108 stationary-phase cells grown in glycerol minimal medium at pH 5.5 were harvested by centrifugation (4,000 g, 4°C) and washed twice with 0.9% NaCl. Cells were mixed one to one with the Gad reagent (1 g/l l-glutamic acid, 0.05 g/l bromocresol green, 90 g/l NaCl, 0.3% (v/v) Triton X-100) and incubated for 30 min at 35°C. The presence of this enzyme was monitored by the color shift of bromocresol green, which turns from yellow to blue (Deininger et al,).
Data availability
The mass spectrometry proteomics data have been deposited to the ProteomeXchange Consortium (http://proteomecentral.proteomexchange.org) via the PRIDE partner repository (Vizcaíno et al,) with the dataset identifier PXD001226.
The transcriptomic data discussed in this work have been deposited in NCBI's Gene Expression Omnibus (Edgar et al,) and are accessible through GEO Series accession number GSE62094 (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/geo/query/acc.cgi?acc=GSE62094).