ABSTRACT:
The successful application of MRM in biological specimens raises the exciting possibility that assays can be configured to measure all human proteins, resulting in an assay resource that would promote advances in biomedical research. We report the results of a pilot study designed to test the feasibility of a large-scale, international effort in MRM assay generation. We have configured, validated across three laboratories, and made publicly available as a resource to the community 645 novel MRM assays representing 319 proteins expressed in human breast cancer. Assays were multiplexed in groups of >150 peptides and deployed to quantify endogenous analyte in a panel of breast cancer-related cell lines. Median assay precision was 5.4%, with high inter-laboratory correlation (R2 >0.96). Peptide measurements in breast cancer cell lines were able to discriminate amongst molecular subtypes and identify genome-driven changes in the cancer proteome. These results establish the feasibility of a scaled, international effort.
METHODS:
ONLINE METHODS
Reagents
Urea (Ultra grade), iodoacetamide (IAM, Ultra grade), dithiothreitol (DTT), tris(2-carboxyethyl)phosphine (TCEP), EGTA, EDTA, and phosphatase inhibitor cocktails #1 and #2 were obtained from Sigma Aldrich. Trypsin Gold was purchased from Promega. MS grade acetonitrile (MeCN) and water (Optima LCMS, #A955 and #W6, respectively) and ethanol (ETOH) were purchased from Thermo Fisher Scientific. Synthetic heavy and light peptides were purchased from Thermo Fisher Scientific, New England Peptide, and 21st Century Biochemicals.
Processing of breast cancer tissues
Surgically resected human breast cancers representing each breast cancer sub-type (ER+/HER2−, ER−/HER2+, ER+/HER2+, and ER−/HER2−) were obtained from the Fred Hutchinson Cancer Research Center’s and the University of Washington’s Breast Specimen Repository & Registry under IRB 5306. Marker determinations were made as part of the routine diagnostic workup of these tumors (e.g. IHC for ER and IHC ± FISH for HER2). Tissues were weighed while frozen and immediately transferred to ice-cold PBS to thaw. Once thawed, tissues were blotted to remove excess PBS, quickly chopped, and immediately transferred to ice-cold lysis buffer (25 mM Tris, 6 M Urea, 1 mM EDTA, 1 mM EGTA, 1 mM TCEP, 1% Sigma phosphatase inhibitor cocktail 1, 1% Sigma phosphatase inhibitor cocktail 2) at a mass ratio of 1:4 tissue:buffer. Tissues were homogenized in 1.5 or 0.5 mL microcentrifuge vials with disposable pestles, as was appropriate for tissue size. After disruption, samples were incubated in lysis buffer on a roller for 15 minutes at 4°C. Samples were then spun at 14k RPM for 10 minutes at 4°C, and the liquid phase was removed. To remove any residual debris, lysates were spun again at 14k RPM at 4°C and the liquid phase was again removed. Lysates were then aliquotted and stored at −80°C.
Lysates were pooled by mass based on a BCA (Pierce) measurement of lysate protein concentrations. Lysate pools for each tumor sub-type were processed in parallel. Briefly, lysates were reduced in 20 mM TRIS/20 mM DTT for 30 minutes at 37°C with shaking, followed by alkylation with 50 mM IAM in the dark at room temperature. Lysates were then diluted 1:10 with 100 mM TRIS, pH 8, before trypsin was added at a 1:50 trypsin:protein ratio by mass. After 2 hours, a second aliquot was added at 1:100 enzyme:substrate. Digestion was carried out overnight at 37°C with shaking. After 16 hours, the reaction was quenched with formic acid, final concentration 1% by volume. Digests were desalted using C-18 cartridges (Waters Cat. #WAT094225) with vacuum. The C-18 cartridges were washed with 3 volumes of 80% MeCN/0.1% formic acid (FA), then equilibrated with 4 washes of 0.1% FA. The digest was applied to the C-18 cartridge, then washed with 4 volumes 0.1% FA before being eluted drop by drop with 3 washes of 80% MeCN/0.1%FA. The eluate was then aliquotted by volume and digests were lyophilized, followed by storage at −80°C until use.
Growth of cell lines
All cell lines were obtained from American Type Culture Collection (ATCC). The cell lines were characterized and authenticated by ATCC using short tandem repeat (STR) DNA profiles. Individual cell lines were cultured as follows. Cells were thawed in 37°C water bath. The vials were wiped down with 70% ETOH, the cells were spun at 180 x g for 8 minutes at 4°C, the supernatant was discarded and the cells were resuspended in 10 mL medium (Supplementary Table 1). The cells were transferred to a 100mm x 20 mm plate (adherent cells) or T25 Flask (suspension cells) and incubated at 37°C, 5% CO2. The adherent cells were split at 80–90% confluence (cell line-dependent) by removing growth medium by aspiration, adding 2 mL 0.25% Trypsin-EDTA per 100 mm x 20 mm plate or 6 mL 0.25% Trypsin-EDTA per T175 Flask, and incubating cells at room temperature with occasional mixing until the cells lifted from the surface as seen under the microscope. Two to four volumes of medium containing serum were added to quench trypsin, and, if needed, a cell lifter was used to remove all cells from culture surface. The cells were pooled and additional medium was added as needed to obtain the optimal split ratio (cell line dependent - ranging from 1:2 to 1:6 as conditions warranted). The cells were dispensed into culture containers (100 mm x 20 mm plate for 10 mL final volume, T75 Flask for 12 to 15 mL and T175 Flask for 25 to 35 mL). The cells were grown, lifted from the surface as above, pooled in a 50 mL Falcon tube, and spun at 180 x g for 8 minutes at 4°C. The supernatant was removed and the cells were resuspended in freezing medium (90% growth medium + 10% DMSO) and aliquotted into 1.8 mL Cryovials. The vials were placed in a Nalgene freezing container (Cat. #5100-001), frozen overnight at −80°C, and transferred for storage in the vapor phase of a liquid nitrogen tank.
Preparation of protein lysates from cell lines
Individual and pooled cell lysates were prepared as needed. Cells were transferred to pre-cooled 50 mL tubes, and were spun at 180 x g for 8 minutes at 4°C and the supernatant was discarded. Cells from the same cell line were resuspended and pooled in 10 mL ice-cold DPBS, removing 50 μL for cell counting by Hemocytometer. Cells were washed twice by adding ice-cold DPBS to 50 mL, spinning cells 180 x g for 8 min at 4°C and discarding the supernatant. Lysis buffer was added to a final concentration of 0.5x108 cells / mL on ice, and the cell suspension was sonicated twice for 10 seconds (550 Sonic Dimembrator, Fisher Scientific; knob set to 5). The lysates were transferred by pipette tip to micro-centrifuge tubes and vortexed twice for 15 seconds, with a 10 minute rest on ice in between. The lysates were centrifuged at 20k x g for 10 minutes at 4°C and the supernatants transferred to 1.0 mL cryo-vials (Nunc Cat. #377267) and stored in liquid N2. Lysate protein concentration was determined by BCA. For discovery profiling, lysates were pooled by protein mass based on their molecular sub-type (ER+/HER2−, ER−/HER2+, ER+/HER2+, and ER−/HER2−). The lysates were reduced in 100 mM TRIS/20 mM TCEP for 30 minutes at 37°C with shaking, followed by alkylation with 50 mM iodoacetamide in the dark at room temperature. Lysates were then diluted 1:10 with 100 mM TRIS, pH8, before trypsin was added at a 1:50 trypsin:protein ratio by mass. After 2 hours, a second aliquot was added at 1:100 enzyme:substrate. Digestion was carried out overnight at 37°C with shaking. After 16 hours, the reaction was quenched with formic acid, final concentration 1% by volume. Digests were desalted using C-18 cartridges (Waters Cat. #WAT094225) with vacuum. The C-18 cartridges were washed with 3 volumes of 80% MeCN/0.1% FA, and then equilibrated with 4 washes of 0.1% FA. The digest was applied to the C-18 cartridge, and then washed with 4 volumes 0.1% FA before being eluted drop by drop with 3 washes of 80% MeCN/0.1% FA. The eluate was then aliquotted by volume, and digests were lyophilized and stored at −80°C until use.
Empirical identification of targets for MRM assay development
Breast cancer samples (tissue and cell line lysates) representing 4 molecular subtypes based on ER and HER2 status (Supplementary Table 1) were analyzed by shotgun LC-MS/MS. Four pooled tissue samples (one from each of the 4 subtypes) and ten pooled cell line samples (2 pools each from the 4 subtypes and 2 non-tumor “normal”) were analyzed by 1D- and 2D-LC-MS/MS. Results from the 2D-LC-MS/MS analysis were used to measure the relative abundances of the proteins in the various subtypes and to distinguish those that were differentially expressed. From this list of candidates, proteins with two proteotypic peptides that were observed by 1D-LC-MS/MS (considered to be at a sufficient intensity to be seen reliably in MRM) and were observed in the corresponding pooled tissue sample were prioritized for assay development.
Two analytical systems were used for analysis of the tissue and cell line lysates. For the first system, the LC system consisted of a nanoAcquity HPLC (Waters) with high pH mobile phases of 20 mM ammonium formate at pH 10 in water (A1) and 100% acetonitrile (B1) and low pH mobile phases of 0.1% formic acid in water (A2) and 0.1% formic acid in acetonitrile (B2). For the 2D-LC-MS/MS analyses, 10 μg of protein digest was injected at high pH onto a 300 μm x 50 mm XBridge C18, 130Å, 5 μm column (Waters Cat. #186003682). A step gradient was used to elute the sample off of the high pH reverse-phase column in 6 distinct fractions using 11.1, 14.5, 17.4, 20.8, 45.0 and 65.0% B. Fractions were eluted from the high pH column into 20 μL/min of low pH (A2) and onto a 180 μm x 20 mm C18, 100Å, 5 μm, column (Waters Cat. #186006527) by the following method: hold 3% B for 0.5 min, gradient from 3 to step% B for 0.5 min, hold step% B for 4 min gradient from step to 3% B for 0.5 min, re-equilibrate at 3% B for 15 min. The flow rate was 2 μL/min. 2D-LC-MS/MS samples eluted from the trap column and separated by a 100 μm x 100 mm C18, 130Å, 1.7 μm, column (Waters Cat. #186003546) by the following method: gradient from 3 to 40% B for 120 min, gradient from 40 to 90% B for 2 min, hold 90% B for 10 min, re-equilibrate at 3% B for 20 min. The flow rate was 1000 nL/min. 1D-LC-MS/MS analyses were carried out as described without a trap column, using direct injection of 2 μg protein digest. The HPLC was coupled to an LTQ-Orbitrap Velos hybrid mass spectrometer using an Advance CaptiveSpray source (Michrom Bioresources) operated in positive ion mode. A spray voltage of 1700 V was applied to the nanospray tip. MS/MS analysis consisted of 1 full scan MS from 300–2000 m/z at resolution 30000 followed by 15 data dependent MS/MS scans. Dynamic exclusion parameters included repeat count 1, exclusion list size 500, and exclusion duration 15 seconds. For 1D-LC-MS/MS analyses, 5 replicate injections were performed.
The second analytical system consisted of an Eksigent nanoLC-Ultra 2Dplus (Eksigent Technologies) used for a direct injection of 1 μg of sample onto a 75 μm x 15 cm column made from a PicoFrit column (New Objective) packed with Magic C18 AQ 5 μm, 100 Å resin (Michrom Bioresources). The samples eluted from the column by the following method: gradient from 3 to 40% B for 120 min, gradient from 40 to 90% B for 2 min, hold 90% B for 10 min, re-equilibrate at 3% B for 20 min. The flow rate was 200 nL/min. The HPLC was coupled to an LTQ-Orbitrap hybrid mass spectrometer using an Advance CaptiveSpray source (Michrom Bioresources) operated in positive ion mode. A spray voltage of 1700 V was applied to the nanospray tip. MS/MS analysis consisted of 1 full scan MS from 300–2000 m/z at resolution 60000 followed by 10 data dependent MS/MS scans. Dynamic exclusion parameters included repeat count 1, exclusion list size 500, and exclusion duration 15 seconds. 5 replicate injections were performed.
Data were searched against version 3.69 of the Human International Protein Index (IPI) sequence database with decoy sequences using Spectrum Mill, OMSSA, and the X!Tandem database search engine with a previously described score plugin. All searches were performed with tryptic enzyme constraint set for up to two missed cleavages, oxidized methionine set as a variable modification and carbamidomethylated cysteine set as a static modification. For X!Tandem, peptide MH+ mass tolerances were set at ±2.0 Da with post search filtering of precursor mass to 50 ppm and fragment MH+ mass tolerances were set at ±0.5 Da. For OMSSA, peptide MH+ mass tolerances were set at ±2.0 Da and fragment MH+ mass tolerances were set at ±0.5 Da. For Spectrum Mill, peptide MH+ mass tolerances were set at 20 ppm and fragment MH+ mass tolerances were set at ±0.7 Da. Identifications from three search engines were made with an FDR < 0.005 based on a decoy database search. The LC-MS/MS proteomics data have been deposited to the ProteomeXchange Consortium (http://proteomecentral.proteomexchange.org) via the PRIDE partner repository with the dataset identifier PXD000246. The intensity of each peptide in each subtype (including normal) was measured by two methods (MS1 and MS2). MS1 measures the precursor ion intensity for each acquisition (reported by SpectrumMill) and MS2 measures the sum of intensities of matched fragment ions for each acquisition. The intensity values were normalized by the median values of each individual acquisition and then log base 2 transformed. For each peptide, the reported intensity value for a given subtype was the maximum value between the two pools and between the MS1 and MS2 measurements.
Results from the 2D-LC-MS/MS analysis (where the method is more sensitive to detection of the analytes) were used to measure the relative abundances of the proteins in the various subtypes and to distinguish those that were differentially expressed. Absolute differential expression of a peptide was measured by the ratio of the highest intensity of the samples from a given subtype to the highest intensity of the samples from a comparator subtype (e.g. ER+ vs. ER−). Relative differential expression was measured by a differential score (DScore), which took the ratio and normalized it to the sum of the standard deviations of all intensities associated with the two comparator subtypes. Proteins were ranked according to the weighted average of the ratio and DScore of the individual peptides from that protein. From this list of candidates, proteins with two proteotypic peptides that were observed by 1D-LC-MS/MS (considered to be at a sufficient intensity to be seen reliably in MRM) and were observed in the corresponding pooled tissue sample (maximizing the value of the assay as a resource to the community as well as providing a suite of validated assays to be used to develop approaches for dealing with the difficulties of tissue-based analysis) were prioritized for assay development.
Qualification of potential targets on a triple quadrupole platform
The detectability of prioritized targets was verified on a triple quadrupole (QqQ) system. Proteotypic peptides and suitable transitions could be optimized directly from the discovery libraries, but to ensure that we could successfully develop an MRM assay, we confirmed detection using a triple quadrupole mass spectrometer prior to final peptide selection. Each candidate peptide was qualified by detection of endogenous analyte in a pool of all cell line lysates used in the profiling experiments using MRM (4000 or 5500 QTRAP (Sciex)). Peptides were filtered to include only those that were proteotypic, had a hydrophobicity calculated by SSRCalc between 8 – 57, did not contain methionine, and did not contain N-terminal cysteine or glutamine. For peptides meeting these criteria, the 10 most intense transitions were selected from a consensus spectral library of all identifications and exported into a scheduled MRM method based on retention time prediction using SSRCalc 3.0 (100A). The exported transition list was separated into multiple instrument methods so that there were no more than 1000 transitions per MRM analysis.
Verification of the MRM detectability of the endogenous peptide signals was performed using an Eksigent nanoLC-Ultra 2Dplus (Eksigent Technologies, Dublin, CA) coupled to a 5500 QTRAP mass spectrometer (ABSciex). Mobile phases consisted of 0.1% formic acid in water (A) and 90% acetonitrile with 0.1% formic acid (B). The pool of cell line lysates (1 μg) was loaded onto a 0.2 × 5 mm Chromolith CapRod RP-18e column (EMD Chemicals) for 3 minutes at 10 μL/min with 5% mobile phase B. The peptides were then by separated by a 0.1 × 150 mm Chromolith CapRod RP-18e column (EMD Chemicals) by the following gradient method: hold 5% B for 9 min, gradient from 5 to 40% B for 100 min, gradient from 40 to 90% B for 1 min, hold 90% B for 5 min, re-equilibrate at 5% B for 14 min. The flow rate was 1000 nL/min. The trap column was back-flushed during the last 5 minutes of an acquisition using 5% B at 10 μL/min. The source employed was an Advance CaptiveSpray source (Michrom Bioresources). The MS was used in positive ion mode with typical source parameters consisting of a 1700 V ion spray voltage, curtain gas setting of 10, collision gas setting of medium, ion source gas 1 setting of 0, and an interface heater temperature of 110 °C. Collision energy (CE) and declustering potential (DP) parameters were set by Skyline, EP was set to 10, CXP was set to 10 and Q1 and Q3 set to unit/unit resolution (0.7 Da). The scheduled MRM option was used for all data acquisition with a target scan time of 2.25 seconds, and a 20 minute MRM detection window. The results of the MRM analysis were imported into Skyline. A positive identification of the peptide from the MRM was based on the relative intensities of the transitions compared to the relative intensities of the fragments in the shotgun MS/MS spectrum, yielding a Skyline dot product score greater than 0.95.
LC-MRM-MS for quantitative analysis
All quantitative MRM studies, including response curves and profiling cell lysates, were conducted using the following approach. The LC-MRM-MS analysis was performed by two-column switching on a nanoLC-MRM-MS system. The LC system consisted of an Eksigent nanoLC-Ultra 2Dplus connected to a cHiPLC-Nanoflex system (Eksigent Technologies). Mobile phases consisted of 0.1% formic acid in water (A) and 90% acetonitrile with 0.1% formic acid (B). 1 μL of sample was loaded onto and separated by a 75 μm x 15 cm ChromXP C18-CL 3 μm 120 Å column (Eksigent Technologies). Because the method employed two-column switching, the sample was loaded onto the column being regenerated (i.e. the column where flow was not directed to the MS) by the following method: gradient from 50 to 90% B for 2 min, hold 90% B for 5 min, gradient from 90 to 3% B for 1 min, re-equilibrate at 3% B for 42 min. The sample was injected onto the loading column at 25 minutes. The column was switched (i.e. flow was directed to the MS) and the sample was separated by the following gradient method: gradient from 3 to 7% B for 3 min, gradient from 7 to 25% B for 27 min, gradient from 25 to 40% B for 7 min, gradient from 40 to 60% B for 1 min, hold 60% B for 2 min, gradient from 60 to 3% B for 1 min, re-equilibrate at 3% B for 9 min. The flow rate was 300 nL/min and the column temperature was 40 °C. The LC system was coupled to a 5500 QTRAP mass spectrometer (ABSciex) by an Advance CaptiveSpray source (Michrom Bioresources). The MS was used in positive ion mode with parameters consisting of a 1200 V ion spray voltage, curtain gas setting of 10, nebulizer gas setting of 0, and an interface heater temperature of 110 °C. CE was set by Skyline, DP was set to 100, EP was set to 10, CXP was set to 10 and Q1 and Q3 set to unit/unit resolution (0.7 Da).Throughout the method, the actual cycle time remained at or below 2 seconds allowing for measurement of at least 10 points across the peaks.
Quantitative MRM assay development and characterization by response curves
Heavy stable isotope-labeled standards (SIS) and matched light versions were synthesized and purified to >95% purity by HPLC. Heavy peptides incorporated a fully atom labeled 13C and 15N isotope at the C-terminal lysine (K) or arginine (R) position of each (tryptic) peptide, resulting in a mass shift of +8 or +10 Da, respectively. Peptides were quantified by amino acid analysis and aliquots were stored in 30% acetonitrile/0.1% formic acid at −80°C until use. Each synthetic peptide was analyzed by MS/MS on an LTQ mass spectrometer using infusion with an Advion TriVersa interface. The spectral library from these analyses was used to select transitions for optimization. Optimal collision energy for a hybrid triple quadrupole/linear ion trap mass spectrometer (5500 QTRAP) for each of the peptides was determined by injecting 50 fmol standard peptide solutions into a flow of 30% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid at a flow rate of 1 μL/min. Optimal values were determined by ramping the potentials and evaluating the results through DiscoveryQuant (Sciex). The top 3 transitions were selected for method development based on the presence of abundant y-ions at m/z greater than the precursor. In the absence of high m/z y-ions, the most abundant fragment ions were selected.
The analytical performance of the biomarker candidate assays was characterized by performing a response curve in a background matrix consisting of an equal mix (by protein mass) of all of the cell lines. Because the concentration of a number of analytes was expected to exceed the practical linear range of the assay, response curves were generated in the pooled lysate and a 1:10 dilution of the pooled lysate (1.0 μg/μL and 0.1 μg/μL background matrix). Digestion was performed in an automated fashion as described above using an Eppendorf epMotion 5075 automated pipetting system. A reverse curve was prepared in which the SIS peptide concentration was varied over 8 concentration points using 3-fold serial dilutions over the range 200–0.091 nM. Light peptide was also spiked into the cell lysate pool at 5nM to ensure that the heavy to light peak areas were within two orders of magnitude. Blanks and double blanks were prepared and analyzed in addition to the concentration points of the curve. Three process replicates were prepared and analyzed at the eight concentration points (along with blank and double-blank samples). Retention times on the LC platform were empirically determined using a mixture of the standard stable isotope-labeled synthetic peptides in a non-scheduled fashion. Once the retention times were known, scheduled MRMs were set up using a 150 second MRM detection window and a target cycle time of 1.5 seconds.
Peak integration was performed by Skyline, and the integrations were manually checked. Peak specificity between the light (or endogenous) and heavy (or SIS) MRM signal was defined as the detection of ≥1 transition from the endogenous peptide exactly co-eluting with ≥2 transitions from the stable isotope-labeled peptide, with the relative intensity of the light transition(s) deviating no more than 20% compared to the relative intensity of the corresponding heavy transitions. Linear regression was used to fit the serial dilution data points for each curve. Regression was performed using a 1/y weighting on all points having a correlation coefficient of >0.98. Limits of detection (LOD) and lower limits of quantification (LLOQ) for each transition were obtained by using the average of the three blank measurements plus three times the standard deviation of the noise (for LOD) and ten times the standard deviation of the noise (for LLOQ), respectively. The upper limit of quantification (ULOQ) was determined by the highest concentration point of the response curve that was maintained in the linear range of the response. An assay was deemed successful if it was precise (%CV ≤ 20% at the lowest concentration point in the working range of the assay) and specific, as defined above (≥1 light transition co-eluting with ≥2 heavy transitions). Assays that met these specificity/precision criteria were considered successful assays.
Deployment of analytically validated MRM assays on a panel of cell lines
Digestion of the individual cell lines at two concentrations (1.0 μg/μL and 0.1 μg/μL, by protein mass) was performed in an automated fashion as described above. After digestion, a mix of SIS peptides was spiked into the individual cell lysates at the concentrations shown in Supplementary Table 4. The “heavy” peptides were spiked at one of three possible concentrations, depending on the LLOQ of the peptide MRM assay as well as the expected endogenous signal. Spike levels were high enough above the LLOQ so as not to contribute unnecessarily to the assay CV and were designed to be close to expected endogenous levels so that the peak area ratio was not outside of the range of 100:1 and 1:100. Three complete process replicates were prepared and analyzed for the 30 individual cell lines. As with the response curves, retention times on the LC platform were empirically determined using a mixture of the standard stable isotope-labeled synthetic peptides in a non-scheduled fashion. Once the retention times were known, scheduled MRMs were set up using a 150 second MRM detection window and a target cycle time of 1.5 seconds. The quantitative LC-MRM-MS analysis was performed using the method described above. MRM data were processed using Skyline. All data were manually inspected to ensure correct peak detection, absence of interferences, and accurate integration. Reported peak areas are the sum of the peak area and background area reported by Skyline. Peak specificity between the light (or endogenous) and heavy (or SIS) MRM signal was defined as the detection of ≥1 transition from the endogenous peptide exactly co-eluting with ≥2 transitions from the stable isotope-labeled peptide, with the relative intensity of the light transition(s) deviating no more than 20% compared to the relative intensity of the corresponding heavy transitions. Peptide concentrations are reported from the results of one quantifying transition, defined as the transition with the lowest LLOQ with no interferences for a given peptide. When a working assay had two or more transitions that met these criteria, the quantifying transition was defined as the transition with the lowest CV at the LLOQ. Working assays were described as “informative” if it were sufficiently sensitive to precisely quantify the endogenous analyte in at least one cell line. Endogenous levels were calculated by integrating peaks from the heavy and light signals and measuring the peak area ratio against the isotope-labeled analog, which was spiked at a known concentration in the lysates. Peak integration was performed by Skyline, and the integrations were manually checked. For the individual data sets, 8% of the integrations were changed after manual investigation. Precision was determined by measuring the coefficient of variation (CV, standard deviation divided by the mean) and expressed as a percent. Integration results were exported to the program R for linear regression and statistical analysis.
Cell lysate samples were analyzed in complete process triplicate (including digestion) at two cell lysate protein concentrations (1.0 μg/μL and 0.1 μg/μL). All reported results are from the 1.0 μg/μL data set unless the measurements were above the upper level of quantification (ULOQ) or missing. In those cases, the results from the 0.1 μg/μL data set were normalized to the lysate protein amount and reported in place of the 1.0 μg/μL results. Endogenous levels reported at 0.1 μg/μL, which make up 4.2% of the reported measurements, are marked with an asterisk in Supplementary Tables 4 and 5.
Results from the peptide quantification were used to report protein concentrations, assuming 100% recovery of the peptides. From the results of the two peptides associated with a given protein, the median values of the triplicate measurements were considered. Concentrations of 0.5*LLOQ or 2*ULOQ were imputed for missing values below LLOQ and above ULOQ, respectively. For a given protein, the peptide with the least number of missing values among the 30 cell lines was used to calculate protein concentration. If multiple peptides had the same number of missing values, the most intense peptide was used. Clustering was performed with these protein concentrations using the R function heatmap with complete linkage. All MRM data (response curves and cell line measurements) are available at https://proteomics.fhcrc.org/CPAS/project/Published%20Experiments/International%20MRM%20Assays/begin.view?.
Cellular compartment and biological process characterization of proteins included in the study
A total of 5,416 Gene Ontology (GO) annotations were obtained for the 319 proteins in the study from the Gene2GO dataset derived from NCBI Entrez Gene resources (ftp://ftp.ncbi.nih.gov/gene/DATA/). Broad classifications of the gene products based on cellular compartment and biological process were determined by cross-mapping to the Generic GO Slim dataset (http://www.geneontology.org/GO.slims.shtml). Cellular Compartment GO Slim annotations were available for 288 of the proteins in the study, which mapped to 26 compartment terms. Cellular Biological process GO Slim annotations were available for 188 of the proteins in the study, which mapped to 36 biological process terms. Heatmap plots were generated using the heatmap.2 R package.
Proteo-genomic integration
DNA copy number data and RNA expression data were obtained from Neve et al. (2006). Gene expression arrays were available for 232 of the 319 proteins and 28 of the 30 cell lines targeted in this study. Differential expression amongst the molecular subtypes of breast cancer was determined by calculating the p-value and FDR (false discovery rate). The p-value reported is from the nonparametric Wilcoxon rank sum test based on Z statistic. The FDR was calculated using R package qvalue, to control the family wise error due to multiple hypothesis testing.
Both DNA copy number and mRNA expression data were available for 90 of the 319 proteins and 27 of the 30 cell lines targeted in this study. Global normalization was performed for both raw CGH array and expression array data, and copy number amplifications and deletions were inferred using R package cghFlasso. Then for each gene, the average of the pairwise Spearman’s rank correlations among its DNA copy number, RNA expression, and protein expression across the 27 cell lines was calculated. To assess the significance of these average correlation scores, permutation testing was performed (10k permutations), in which the null distributions were estimated through permuting the sample orders in the RNA expression data set and protein expression data set.
Survival analysis
The van ’t Veer et. al. data were downloaded from the Stanford University public repository (http://microarraypubs.stanford.edu/woundNKI/explore.html). The dataset contains gene expression arrays, molecular subtype, and patient clinical outcome information for 244 breast cancer tumors. We normalized the raw data for each array to have median 0 and MAD (median absolute deviance) 1. To investigate the prognostic property of the candidate genes, we first partitioned the 244 samples into two groups by using the median gene expression level of each gene, and performed a Logrank test to compare the KM curves of the two patient groups. For the two genes giving significant p-values in the Logrank test, we further fit a multivariate cox proportional hazard model (R function coxph) to assess the association between gene expression and the survival outcome, accounting for the molecular subtype, age, tumor size, lymph node status, and whether the patient has received chemotherapy.
The Loi et al. dataset, including gene expression data and clinical information for 414 breast cancer tumors, was obtained from (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/geo/query/acc.cgi?acc=GSE6532). After performing the global normalization, R Package “genefu” (version 1.8.0) was used to determine the molecular subtypes of the breast cancer patients in the Loi et. al. data. As described above for the van ’t Veer et. al. dataset, a logrank test and cox proportional hazard model were performed.
Public access to mass spectrometry data
The LC-MS/MS proteomics data have been deposited to the ProteomeXchange Consortium (http://proteomecentral.proteomexchange.org) via the PRIDE partner repository with the dataset identifier PXD000246 (username: review35086; password: ncZMftbc). All MRM data (response curves and cell line measurements) are available at https://proteomics.fhcrc.org/CPAS/project/Published%20Experiments/International%20MRM%20Assays/begin.view?.