ABSTRACT:
We set out to provide a resource to the microbiology community especially with respect to systems biology based endeavors. To this end, we generated a comprehensive dataset monitoring the changes in protein expression, copy number, and post translational modifications in a systematic fashion during growth and ethanol stress in E. coli. We utilized high-resolution mass spectrometry (MS) combined with the Super-SILAC approach. In a single experiment, we have identified over 2300 proteins, which represent approximately 88% of the estimated expressed proteome of E. coli and estimated protein copy numbers using the Intensity Based Absolute Quantitation (iBAQ). The dynamic range of protein expression spanned up to six orders of magnitude, with the highest protein copy per cell estimated at approximately 300,000. We focused on the proteome dynamics involved during stationary phase growth. A global up-regulation of proteins related to stress response was detected in later stages of growth. We observed the down-regulation of the methyl directed mismatch repair system containing MutS and MutL of E. coli growing in long term growth cultures, confirming that higher incidence of mutations presents an important mechanism in the increase in genetic diversity and stationary phase survival in E. coli. During ethanol stress, known markers such as alcohol dehydrogenase and aldehyde dehydrogenase were induced, further validating the dataset. Finally, we performed unbiased protein modification detection and revealed changes of many known and unknown protein modifications in both experimental conditions. Data are available via ProteomeXchange with identifier PXD001648.
METHODS:
Materials and methods
Bacterial strain
The E. coli BW25113 strain was employed in all experiments conducted in this study.
Bacterial cell culture and SILAC labeling
Each experiment was performed in two biological replicates. E. coli cells were grown in a 2L flask containing 500 ml of minimal M9 media with stable isotope-labeled (heavy) L-Lysine-13C6, 15N2 in batch culture. Aliquots of batch culture were removed at each specific growth stage (7 time points) in the growth experiment or collected at pre stress, 10 min, and 2 h post ethanol stress in the ethanol stress experiment (Supplementary Figure 1). Separately, 1.25L of cells were grown in a 5L flask with M9 medium containing unlabeled (light) L-Lysine-12C6, 14N2 at the exact seven different phases of growth or collected at 10 min and 2 h post ethanol stress. For ethanol stress experiments, 4% v/v of ethanol was added when cells had reached an OD600 of 0.4.
Protein extraction and mixing
The cells were harvested by centrifugation at 4000 g for 10 min, media was removed and cells were snap-frozen in liquid nitrogen and stored at −80°C. The cell pellets were resuspended in the appropriate amount of the commercially available YPER lysis buffer (Thermo Scientific), plus 50 μg/ml lysozyme. Cell wall lysis was performed at 37°C for 20 min, followed by brief sonication on ice (1 min at 40% amplitude) to remove DNA. Cellular debris was removed by centrifugation at 13000 g for 30 min. The crude protein extract was precipitated via the methanol/chloroform approach and the proteins were resuspended in denaturation buffer containing 6 M urea/2 M thiourea in 10 mM Tris. Protein concentration was measured by Bradford assay (Bio-Rad, Munich, Germany). Protein extracts obtained from L-Lysine-13C6, 15N2 labeled cells were mixed 1:1:1:1:1:1:1 for growth, and 1:1:1 for ethanol stress to obtain the Super-SILAC standard (SSS) for each respective experiment. Proteins labeled with L-Lysine-12C6, 14N2 (50 μg) were then mixed in an equimolar ratio with the SSS (50 μg), resulting in 7 protein samples per biological replicate.
In-solution digestion
A total of 100 μg (50 μg SSS and 50 μg light) of crude protein extract in denaturation buffer were digested via in-solution prior to peptide separation. Briefly, proteins were reduced with 1 mM dithiothreitol for 1 h shaking at room temperature, alkylated with 5.5 mM iodoacetamide for 1 h shaking at room temperature in the dark, predigested with 1:100 (w/w) endoproteinase Lys-C for 3 h at room temperature, diluted with 4 volumes of 20 mM ammonium bicarbonate followed by an overnight digestion step 1:100 (w/w) endoproteinase Lys-C at room temperature. The protein digest was acidified using trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) to a final concentration of 0.1% (v/v) to stop the protein digestion. In the case of samples fractionated using Off-Gel fractionation no TFA was added. For the intensity-based absolute quantification of proteins (iBAQ), the UPS2 Proteomics Dynamic Range Standard set (Sigma-Aldrich) was spiked in prior to digestion.
Isoelectric focusing
Hundred microgram of peptides were separated using the OFFGEL 3100 Fractionator (Agilent) following the experimental steps as previously reported (Hubner et al.,). Separation was performed on a 13 cm Immobiline DryStrip (GE Healthcare) with a PH separation gradient of 3–13 to a maximum of 50 μA for 20 kVh. Peptides were acidified using an acidic solution (30% ACN, 5% Acetic acid, 10%TFA), followed by a cleanup step using Stage-Tips loaded with C18 material (Rappsilber et al.,).
SDS-PAGE and In-Gel digestion
Protein separation via SDS-PAGE followed by an In-Gel digestion was used for one biological replicate from each Super-SILAC experiment. Briefly, 100 μg (50 μg SSS and 50 μg light) of crude protein extracts were separated on a NuPage Bis-Tris 4–12% gradient gel (Invitrogen). After staining the gel with Coomassie Blue, protein lanes with cut into 12 equal slices. Coomassie Blue stain was subsequently removed from each gel slice via washing with 10 mM ammonium bicarbonate (ABC) and acetonitrile (ACN) (1:1, v/v). Protein slices were reduced with 10 mM dithiothreitol (DTT) in 20 mM (ABC) for 45 min at 56°C and alkylated with 55 mM iodoacetamide IAA in 20 mM ABC for 30 min in the dark at room temperature. Gel slices were washed twice with 5 mM ABC, followed by a dehydration step by incubating with 100% ACN at room temperature. Proteins were digested with Lys-C (Wako) (12.5 ng/μL in 20 mM ABC) at 37°C overnight. Digested peptides were recovered from each gel slice using three consecutive extraction steps: (I) 3% TFA in 30% ACN (II) 0.5% acetic acid in 80% ACN (III) 100% ACN. Resulting peptides were desalted using StageTips (Ishihama et al.,).
LC-MS/MS analysis
All samples were measured on an EASY-nLC II nano-LC (Proxeon Biosystems) coupled to an Orbitrap Elite mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Peptides were further separated chromatographically using a 15 cm PicoTip fused silica emitter with an inner diameter of 75 μm (New Objective) packed in-house with reversed-phase ReproSil-Pur C18-AQ 3 μm resin (Dr. Maisch GmbH). A total of 2 μg of peptides were injected into the column, using the intelliflow technology with solvent A (0.5% acetic acid) at a rate of 200 nL/min to a maximum pressure of 280 Bar. Peptides were then eluted using a 90 min segmented gradient of 5–50% solvent B (80% ACN in 0.5% acetic acid). The mass spectrometer was operated on a data-dependent positive ion mode. Peptide fragmentation (MS/MS) was induced using either collision induced dissociation (CID) or higher-energy collisional dissociation (HCD). Survey spectral full-scans were recorded between 300 and 2000 Thomson at a resolution of 120,000 with a target value of 1E6 charges in the LTQ mass analyzer. The 20 most intense peaks from the survey scans were selected for fragmentation using CID with a normalized collision energy of 35% at a target value of 5000 charges. The dynamic exclusion window was set at 90 s. For operation via HCD, normalized collision energy of 40 eV requiring a minimum signal of 1000 and a target value of 4E4 charges was employed. The spectra were acquired in the Orbitrap mass analyzer with a resolution of 7500. The 15 most intense peaks from the survey scans were selected for fragmentation using HCD.
Data processing
All acquired MS data was processed with the MaxQuant software suite (Cox and Mann,) version 1.2.2.9. Briefly, the SILAC labeling parameter was set to a multiplicity of Two (Lys0, Lys8). After all peptides were quantified, a database search was performed using the MaxQuant internal search engine Andromeda (Cox et al.,). Full enzyme specificity was required, with an allowance of up to two missed cleavages. Lys-C was specified as the protease. MS/MS spectra were searched against the Uniprot Escherichia coli K12 database (taxonomy reference: 833333), complete proteome set containing 4303 protein entries, downloaded Dec 24, 2012. For absolute protein quantification analysis, MS/MS spectra were also searched against another FASTA file containing the Proteomics Dynamic Range Standard (UPS2, Sigma) with a total of 48 entries. Methionine oxidation and protein N-terminal acetylation were defined as variable modifications. Cysteine carbamidomethylation was defined as a fixed modification. MS scan mass tolerance was set to 6 ppm. For CID fragmentation, the MS/MS tolerance was 0.5 Da, whereas for HCD fragmentation the mass tolerance was set to 20 ppm. Peptides and assembled proteins were searched at a false discovery rate (FDR) of 1%. A minimum of two quantified peptides per protein were required for protein quantitation.
Relative protein quantitation
SILAC ratios of proteins (“light” to “heavy”) were transformed to log2 scale and only proteins that were quantified in all seven growth phases (growth) or all three time points (ethanol stress) were considered for further quantitative analysis. The magnitude of fluctuation was expressed by calculating the standard deviation of the log-transformed ratios across the growth phases or time points. The resulting quartiles of the distribution were used to bin proteins according to the extent of fluctuation. Those belonging to the quartile with the highest standard deviation (75–100%) were defined as “fluctuating” or dynamic, whereas those belonging to the quartile with the lowest standard deviation (0–25%) were defined as “non-fluctuating” or static.
Bacterial cell counting
As part of the protein copy number /cell calculation, the total number of E. coli cells were counted. Briefly, E. coli cells were grown in minimal M9 media supplemented with 0.5% glucose at an OD600 = 0.5 (TP3) and 1.0 (TP5) were grown in minimal media. Experiments were performed in biological triplicates and replicates at an OD600 of 0.5 and 1.0, respectively. 500 μl of cells were mixed with 50 μl 25% para-formaldehyde (20 mM MOPS PS = 7) and 50 μl 2.5% glutaraldehyde, followed by an incubation period of 15 min at room temperature. Cells were counted using Fluorescence-activated Cell Sorting (FACS). In brief, the BD LSR Fortesa FACS instrument was used. Standard settings were employed (log scale acquisition, Threshold: 400 FCS, Acquisition speed: low). Gating settings were set according to cell size in order to remove background noise in the form of cellular aggregates and debris. E. coli cells were diluted 1:20 for more accurate counts (5 μl cells, 95 μl water). Each biological replicate was measured 3 times (technical replicates) and averaged in order to obtain the final cell count at each growth phase. The exact number of cells was derived from the total volume of cells taken for protein extraction, and calculated for the amount of input protein material that was used for digestion (50 μg).
Absolute protein quantitation
The absolute protein copy number per cell was calculated for the Super-SILAC growth experiment in two stages of growth: logarithmic and early stationary. To this end, the intensity based absolute quantitation approach (iBAQ) supported by the MaxQuant Software suite was employed as previously shown. The absolute amount of protein is proportional to the absolute molar amounts of the UPS2 protein standard spiked into the protein sample. All acquired iBAQ values were divided by 4, due to the fact that ¼ of the UPS2 protein was spiked in the log and early stationary Super-SILAC growth experimental samples. The total number of cells counted via FACS (Ncells), was used to calculate the absolute protein copy numbers (CNprotein) by utilizing the calculation as previously described (Carpy et al.,): 
NA represents Avogadro's number. The absolute protein amounts calculated for the super-SILAC standard together with corresponding SILAC ratios were used to calculate the absolute amount for each protein in all seven stages of growth in the growth analysis experiment.
Peak time index calculation
For each protein we determined the experimental condition of its highest expression (“peak time index”) as described in Olsen et al.. Briefly, the SILAC ratios for each protein were normalized to the maximal change across the experiment. We then calculated the weighted mean of the expression ratio in a particular condition with respect to the normalized ratios of adjacent conditions, i.e., adjacent growth phases or time points upon ethanol stress. We slightly modified the peak time index calculation as described in Olsen et al. to account for the acyclicity of our experiments. To assign the resulting “peak time index” of every protein to a specific growth phase respective time point, we applied hierarchical clustering on these values using the Euclidian distance and a defined cluster numbers of seven (growth phase) or three (ethanol stress).
Functional enrichment analysis
We retrieved Gene Ontology (GO) annotation of E. coli from the UniProt-GOA database (downloaded on April 18, 2012). To test whether specific annotation terms are enriched or depleted within a set of proteins of interest we applied Fisher's exact test using the theoretical E. coli proteome as background. Derived p-values were further adjusted to address multiple hypothesis testing using the method proposed by Benjamini and Hochberg.
Unbiased detection of protein modifications
All acquired MS data was processed with the MaxQuant software suite (Cox and Mann,) version 1.2.2.9. Briefly, the SILAC labeling parameter was set to a multiplicity of Two (Lys0, Lys8), or as unlabeled (in order to serve as quality control for dependent peptide (DP) function). All other parameters were the same as described above, except that the DP function was enabled in order to search for modified peptides that were not identified. Briefly, MaxQuant compares all identified MS/MS to all unidentified MS/MS spectra. The precursor mass differences are calculated between identified spectra (“base peptides”) and unidentified spectra with similar MS/MS features (“dependent peptides”) and corresponding possible modifications are reported.