ABSTRACT:
Assessing relevant molecular differences between human-induced pluripotent stem cells (hiPSCs) and human embryonic stem cells (hESCs) is important, given that such differences may impact their potential therapeutic use. Controversy surrounds recent gene expression studies comparing hiPSCs and hESCs. Here, we present an in-depth quantitative mass spectrometry-based analysis of hESCs, two different hiPSCs and their precursor fibroblast cell lines. Our comparisons confirmed the high similarity of hESCs and hiPSCS at the proteome level as 97.8% of the proteins were found unchanged. Nevertheless, a small group of 58 proteins, mainly related to metabolism, antigen processing and cell adhesion, was found significantly differentially expressed between hiPSCs and hESCs. A comparison of the regulated proteins with previously published transcriptomic studies showed a low overlap, highlighting the emerging notion that differences between both pluripotent cell lines rather reflect experimental conditions than a recurrent molecular signature.
METHODS:
Materials and methods
Culture of hiPSCs
Induced pluripotent stem cell lines IMR90_iPS and 4Skin_iPS were cultured in Matrigel (Becton Dickinson)-coated dishes, supplemented with mTeSR1 media (Stem Cells Technologies) and passaged every 7 days. Briefly, the cells were washed once with phosphate-buffered saline (PBS; Gibco) before enzymatic treatment with dipase (Chemicon) for ∼3 min. After neutralization with media, the cells were triturated into small clumps or single cells and seeded onto new Matrigel-coated at a split ratio of 1:3 to 1:8. The cells were incubated at 37°C in 5% CO2 incubator.
Characterization of pluripotency
Flow cytometry analysis (FACS)
The expression levels of the pluripotent markers Oct-4, podocalyxin and Tra-1-60 in iPSC populations were assessed by immunofluorescence using flow cytometry. Cells were harvested as a single-cell suspensions using 0.25% trypsin–EDTA (Gibco), fixed and permeabilized (Caltag Laboratories) before incubation with a mouse monoclonal antibody to Oct-4 (1:20, Santa Cruz), podocalyxin (mAb 84, 5 μg, in-house) and Tra-1-60 (1:50, Chemicon). Cells were then washed with 1% BSA/PBS, and incubated in the dark with goat α-mouse antibody FITC-conjugated (DAKO) at 1:500 dilution. After incubation, the cells were washed and resuspended in 1% BSA/PBS for analysis on a FACScan (Becton Dickinson FACS Calibur). All incubations were performed at room temperature for 15 min. For the negative control, cells were stained with the appropriate isotype control.
Staining of hESC for markers
Staining of iPSC was carried out by incubating the cells with fixative Reagent A (Caltag Laboratories) for 1 h, before blocking with 3% BSA/PBS for another hour. After washing with 0.1% Triton/PBS, the cells were incubated with antibodies to Oct-4 (Santa Cruz), SSEA-4 (DHSB) and Tra-1-60 (Chemicon) for 1 h. The detection of bound antibodies to the pluripotent markers was visualized using DAKO goat α-mouse antibody conjugated with PE (diluted 1:500).
Karyotypic stability
Karyotyping analysis was performed by the Cytogenetics Laboratories at the Department of Obstetrics and Gynaecology, KK Women's and Children's Hospital. Cell samples were incubated with BrdU/colcemid (reagent from hospital) for 16 h in 37°C, 5% CO2 incubator.
In-vivo differentiation assay, SCID mice model and teratoma analysis
Induced PSCs were harvested by collagenase (Sigma) treatment and approximately 4–5 × 106 cells were injected with a sterile 22G needle into the rear leg muscle of 4-week-old female SCID mice. Mice that developed tumors approximately 9–10 weeks after injection were killed and the tumors were dissected and fixed in 10% formalin. Tumors were embedded in paraffin, sectioned and examined histologically after hematoxylin and eosin staining.
Sample preparation for MS
Cells (i.e., IMR90_iPS, 4Skin_iPS, hESCs and IMR90 and 4Skin fibroblasts) were harvested by centrifugation at 2500g for 10 min at 4°C. Cell lysis was performed in a buffer containing 8 M urea, 2 M thiourea in a solution of 25 mM ammonium bicarbonate, pH 8.2, with protease and phosphatase inhibitors (Roche). Proteins (∼1 mg) were first reduced/alkylated and digested for 4 h with Lys-C. The mixture was then diluted 4-fold to 2 M urea and digested overnight with trypsin. Digestion was quenched by acidification with formic acid (final concentration 2%). Resulting peptides were then chemically labeled with stable isotope dimethyl labeling as described previously. Briefly, IMR90_iPS and 4Skin_iPS peptides were labeled with a mixture of formaldehyde-H2 and sodium cyanoborohydride (‘light’ reagent). For hESCs and IMR90 and 4Skin fibroblast cells, formaldehyde-D2 with cyanoborohydride (‘intermediate’ reagent) and 13C-D2-formaldehyde with cyanoborodeuteride (‘heavy’ reagent) were used respectively. In a second biological replica experiment, hESC and hiPSC reagents were swapped, whereas ‘heavy’-IMR90/4Skin fibroblast was kept constant. The ‘light’, ‘intermediate’ and ‘heavy’ dimethyl-labeled samples were mixed in 1:1:1 ratio based on total peptide amount, which was determined by running an aliquot of the labeled samples on a regular LC-MS/MS run and comparing overall peptide signal intensities.
Before the mass spectrometic analysis, both replicates were fractionated using SCX systems. For Experiment 1, peptides were fractionated as described elsewhere. The SCX system consisted of an Agilent 1100 HPLC system (Agilent Technologies, Waldbronn, Germany) with two C18 Opti-Lynx (Optimized Technologies, OR) trapping cartridges and a polysulfoethyl A SCX column (PolyLC, Columbia, MD; 200 mm × 2.1 mm inner diameter, 5 μm, 200-Å). The labeled peptides were dissolved in 10% FA and loaded onto the trap columns at 100 μl/min and subsequently eluted onto the SCX column with 80% acetonitrile (ACN; Biosolve, The Netherlands) and 0.05% FA. SCX buffer A was made of 5 mM KH2PO4 (Merck, Germany), 30% ACN and 0.05% FA, pH 2.7; SCX buffer B consisted of 350 mM KCl (Merck, Germany), 5 mM KH2PO4, 30% ACN and 0.05% FA, pH 2.7. The gradient was performed as follows: 0% B for 10 min, 0–85% B in 35 min, 85–100% B in 6 min and 100% B for 4 min. A total of 45 fractions were collected for each set and dried in a vacuum centrifuge. The second SCX system was performed using a Zorbax BioSCX-Series II column (0.8-mm inner diameter × 50-mm length, 3.5 μm). SCX solvent A consists of 0.05% formic acid in 20% ACN, while solvent B was 0.05% formic acid, 0.5 M NaCl in 20% ACN. The SCX salt gradient is as follows: 0–0.01 min (0–2% B); 0.01–8.01 min (2–3% B); 8.01–14.01 min (3–8% B); 14.01–28 min (8–20% B); 28–38 min (20–40% B); 38–48 min (40–90% B); 48–54 min (90% B); 54–60 min (0% B). A total of 50 SCX fractions (1 min each, i.e., 50-μl elution volume) were collected and dried in a vacuum centrifuge. Only the second SCX system was used to fractionate lysates from Experiment 2.
Mass spectrometric analysis
For Experiment 1, we performed nanoflow LC-MS/MS with an LTQ-Orbitrap XL ETD mass spectrometer (Thermo Electron, Bremen, Germany) coupled to an Agilent 1200 HPLC system (Agilent Technologies). SCX fractions were dried, reconstituted in 10% FA and delivered to a trap column (Aqua™ C18, 5 μm (Phenomenex, Torrance, CA); 20 mm × 100-μm inner diameter, packed in-house) at 5 μl/min in 100% solvent A (0.1 M acetic acid in water). Next, peptides eluted from the trap column onto an analytical column (ReproSil-Pur C18-AQ, 3 μm (Dr Maisch GmbH, Ammerbuch, Germany); 40 cm × 50-μm inner diameter, packed in-house) at approximately 100 nl/min in a 90 min or 3 h gradient from 0 to 40% solvent B (0.1 M acetic acid in 8:2 (v/v) ACN/water). The eluent was sprayed via distal coated emitter tips butt-connected to the analytical column. The mass spectrometer was operated in data-dependent mode, automatically switching between MS and MS/MS. Full-scan MS spectra (from m/z 300 to 1500) were acquired in the Orbitrap with a resolution of 60 000 at m/z 400 after accumulation to target value of 500 000 in the linear ion trap. For SCX fractions dominated by singly charged and doubly charged peptides, the five most intense ions at a threshold above 5000 were selected for collision-induced fragmentation in the linear ion trap at a normalized collision energy of 35% after accumulation to a target value of 10 000. For highly charged SCX fractions, the five most intense ions at a threshold of above 500 were fragmented in the linear ion trap using electron-transfer dissociation with supplemental activation (ETcaD) at a target value of 50 000. The ETcaD reagent target value was set to 100 000 and the reaction time to 50 ms.
MS analysis for Experiment 2 was performed with the same LC gradient and configuration but using an LTQ-Orbitrap Velos (Thermo Electron). MS data were acquired with a data-dependent decision tree method as described. Briefly, following the survey scan (30 000 FHMW), the 10 most intense precursor ions were subjected to HCD, ETD-IT or ETD-FT fragmentation. The choice of the most appropriate technique for a selected precursor was determined by a preprogrammed data-dependent decision tree. Essentially, doubly charged peptides were subjected to HCD fragmentation and more highly charged peptides were fragmented using ETD. The normalized collision energy for HCD was set to 35%. ETD was enabled with supplemental activation and the reaction time was set to 50 ms for doubly charged precursors.
Data processing
MS data were processed and quantified with Proteome Discoverer (version 1.3, Thermo Electron) with standardized workflows. This ensures consistent and reproducible quantification for all samples, avoiding possible bias introduced by manual intervention. These workflows are made available as Supplementary Materials. For Experiment 1, peptide identification was performed with Mascot 2.3 (Matrix Science) against a concatenated forward-decoy IPI Human database supplemented with all the frequently observed contaminants in MS (version 3.68, 174 650 entries). The following parameters were used: 50 p.p.m. precursor mass tolerance, 0.5 Da fragment ion tolerance, up to 2 missed cleavages, carbamidomethyl cysteine as fixed modification and oxidized methionine as variable modifications. Dimethyl-based quantitation method was chosen in Proteome Discoverer, with mass precision requirement of 2 p.p.m. for consecutive precursor measurements. Besides, taking into account the isotopic effect of deuterium, we applied 1 min of retention time tolerance for isotope pattern multiplets and allowed spectra with 2 missing channels to be quantified. After identification and quantification, we combined all results originating from the same biological replica and filtered them according to very stringent peptide acceptance criteria. These criteria include (i) mass deviations of ±5 p.p.m., (ii) Mascot Ion Score of at least 20, (iii) a minimum of 7 amino-acid residues per peptide and (iv) position rank 1 in Mascot search. As a result, we obtained peptide FDRs of 0.23 and 0.19% for two respective biological replicas (Supplementary Table S1). Finally, peptide ratios were then normalized against the median (log2). The same criteria were subsequently applied to analyze Experiment 2 except for the following: 0.5 Da fragment ion tolerance for ETD-IT, and 0.02 Da fragment ion tolerance for both HCD and ETD-FT. Peptide FDRs obtained for Experiment 2 were 0.56 and 0.59%, respectively.
The MS data associated with this manuscript can be downloaded from ProteomeCommons.org under the following Tranche hash: d/Ci8K23/EI0YIsZ7OQpxQjkHUlCdAMtiBKQT6a+4McomzkpsxZYLnZYcm1vjmMhHv94w5or5jGg/6l42VgFGtFZSC0AAAAAAAAOtw==.
Microarray analysis
RNA isolation
Cells were washed twice in PBS (Gibco), harvested and quantified using the NucleoCounter (Chemometec). RNA was isolated using TRIzol (Invitrogen)/chloroform according to manufacturer's protocol. RNA in the extracted aqueous phase was concentrated by precipitation with an equal volume of isopropanol at −20°C overnight, and further purified using RNeasy Mini Kit (Qiagen). Quantity of RNA was measured by NanoDrop (Thermo Scientific) and quality evaluated by capillary electrophoresis on QIAxcel (Qiagen).
Transcriptome analysis
Affymetrix U133 Plus 2.0 GeneChip Microarrays (Human Genome) were used according to manufacturer's protocol. Briefly, GeneChip 3′ IVT Express Kit was used to generate labeled amplified RNA (aRNA) from 500 ng of total RNA, with 12.5 μg of fragmented aRNA subsequently hybridized onto each microarray. Intact aRNA yield was measured by NanoDrop, and quality of intact and fragmented aRNA evaluated on 2% agarose gel. Hybridizations were carried out at 45°C for 16 h with reagents from GeneChip Hybridization, Wash, and Stain Kit, with subsequent washing and staining of arrays automated and preprogrammed (FS450_0001) on Fluidics Station 450. Arrays were scanned using GeneChip Scanner 3000.
Microarray data analysis
Affymetrix Expression Console software was used to analyze scanned image files. Array data were quantified and normalized using MAS5.0. algorithm, with corresponding detection calls for each probeset determined. Only data from probesets that (i) were flagged as present in at least one set of biological replicates, and (ii) possessed the highest summed intensities among redundant probesets—those annotated with similar gene name or unigene identifier, were used for subsequent comparison with the proteome study. Microarray data are available at the NCBI Gene Expression Omnibus database under the accession numbers GSE26451 and GSE26453.
Bioinformatic analysis
Protein classification (molecular function, biological process, cellular component and protein class) was performed using the PANTHER classification system. GO enrichment was performed using a Binomial test as described elsewhere, the entire list of identified proteins was used as the reference data set. Protein and mRNA levels were combined using official gene symbols (HUGO). Protein networks were created with String.
Statistical analysis
Significance analysis of microarrays was used to identify significantly regulated proteins between hESCs, hiPSCs and fibroblasts. Only those proteins that were quantified in both experiments (i.e., IMR90 and 4Skin) and in both biological replicas were analyzed under statistical criteria. Overall, log2-transformed ratios for 2683 proteins were processed by using the MultiExperiment Viewer software (version 4.7.4). Briefly, one-class test was used (the mean value to test again was 0), 1000 permutations were chosen for a better approximation of FDR values, S0 value was selected according to the method proposed by) and q-values were calculated for each protein. Delta values were manually adjusted to ∼1% FDR. SAM graphs for both comparisons hESCs/hiPSCs and Fibroblasts/hiPSCs are shown in Supplementary Figure S10. The results from the analyses are presented in Supplementary Table S4.
Note added in proof
While this paper was in revision, a related proteomic study appeared comparing hESCs and hiPSCs. Their findings are well in agreement with ours, reporting a high similarity of hESC and hiPSC proteomes with a small subset of proteins differentially expressed between both pluripotent cell lines.