ABSTRACT:
The target of rapamycin (TOR) kinase senses the availability of nutrients and coordinates cellular growth and proliferation with nutrient abundance. Inhibition of TOR mimics nutrient starvation and leads to the reorganization of many cellular processes, including autophagy, protein translation, and vesicle trafficking. TOR regulates cellular physiology by modulating phosphorylation and ubiquitylation signaling networks; however, the global scope of such regulation is not fully known. Here, we used a mass-spectrometry-based proteomics approach for the parallel quantification of ubiquitylation, phosphorylation, and proteome changes in rapamycin-treated yeast cells. Our data constitute a detailed proteomic analysis of rapamycin-treated yeast with 3590 proteins, 8961 phosphorylation sites, and 2299 di-Gly modified lysines (putative ubiquitylation sites) quantified. The phosphoproteome was extensively modulated by rapamycin treatment, with more than 900 up-regulated sites one hour after rapamycin treatment. Dynamically regulated phosphoproteins were involved in diverse cellular processes, prominently including transcription, membrane organization, vesicle-mediated transport, and autophagy. Several hundred ubiquitylation sites were increased after rapamycin treatment, and about half as many decreased in abundance. We found that proteome, phosphorylation, and ubiquitylation changes converged on the Rsp5-ubiquitin ligase, Rsp5 adaptor proteins, and Rsp5 targets. Putative Rsp5 targets were biased for increased ubiquitylation, suggesting activation of Rsp5 by rapamycin. Rsp5 adaptor proteins, which recruit target proteins for Rsp5-dependent ubiquitylation, were biased for increased phosphorylation. Furthermore, we found that permeases and transporters, which are often ubiquitylated by Rsp5, were biased for reduced ubiquitylation and reduced protein abundance. The convergence of multiple proteome-level changes on the Rsp5 system indicates a key role of this pathway in the response to rapamycin treatment. Collectively, these data reveal new insights into the global proteome dynamics in response to rapamycin treatment and provide a first detailed view of the co-regulation of phosphorylation- and ubiquitylation-dependent signaling networks by this compound.
METHODS:
MATERIALS AND METHODS
Yeast Culture and Protein Lysate Preparation
Saccharomyces cerevisiae cells (strain BY4742 auxotroph for lysine) were grown in a synthetic complete medium supplemented with SILAC “light” lysine (l-lysine 12C614N2), SILAC “medium” lysine (l-lysine 12C614N22H4), and SILAC “heavy” lysine (l-lysine 13C615N2). At a logarithmic growth phase (A600 value of ∼0.5), “light”-labeled yeast were mock treated, whereas “medium”- and “heavy”-labeled yeast were treated with rapamycin at 200 nm final concentration for 1 h and 3 h, respectively. Cells were harvested at 3000 × g for 5 min, washed twice in sterile water, resuspended in lysis buffer (50 mm Tris, pH 7.5, 150 mm NaCl, 1 mm EDTA, 1× Mini Complete protease inhibitor mixture (Roche), 5 mm sodium fluoride, 1 mm sodium orthovanadate, 5 mm β-glycerophosphate, 1 mm N-ethylmaleimide), frozen in liquid nitrogen, and ground using an MM400 ball mill (Retsch, Dusseldorf, Germany) for 2 to 3 min at 25 Hz. To thawed lysates, Nonidet P-40 and sodium deoxycholate were added to final concentrations of 1% and 0.1%, respectively. After centrifugation, proteins were precipitated using ice-cold acetone and resuspended in urea solution (6 m urea, 2 m thio-urea, 10 mm Hepes, pH 8.0), and the protein concentration was determined via Bradford assay.
MS Sample Preparation
Proteins extracted from “light”, “medium”, and “heavy” SILAC-labeled yeast were mixed in a 1:1:1 ratio, treated with 1 mm DTT for 45 min, alkylated with 5.5 mm chloracetamide for 45 min in the dark, and digested overnight with protease Lys-C (1:100 protease-to-protein ratio). For di-Gly peptide enrichment analysis, an aliquot of the digest was further treated with modified trypsin overnight (1:100 protease-to-protein ratio). Proteases were inactivated by the addition of TFA to a final concentration of 1%, and precipitates were removed by centrifugation at 2000 × g for 5 min. Peptide supernatants were loaded onto reversed phase (C18) Sep-Pak cartridges (Waters, Milford, MA). Peptides from the cartridges were eluted using 4 ml of 50% acetonitrile solution, and the concentration was determined via absorbance at 280 nm using a spectrophotometer (NanoDrop 2000, Thermo Scientific). To analyze the proteome of rapamycin-treated cells, 30 μg of peptides were acidified using 1% TFA and loaded onto a strong cation exchange (SCX) microtip column prepared as described previously. We used an optimized protocol for micro-SCX-based fractionation. Briefly, the column was conditioned with 100 μl of 0.1% TFA, 50% acetonitrile, washed with 100 μl of pH 8.5 elution buffer, and equilibrated with 100 μl of 0.1% TFA, 50% acetonitrile. After loading, the microtip column was washed with 100 μl of 0.1% TFA, 50% acetonitrile, and then peptides were eluted by stepwise 100-μl aliquots of SCX buffers of pH 4.0, 4.5, 5.0, 5.5, 6.5, and 8.5. Buffers for SCX were prepared from 20 mm acetic acid, 20 mm boric acid, 20 mm phosphoric acid starting solution by adjusting to desired pH with 1 m NaOH and adjusting the final concentration of acetonitrile to 40%. To remove acetonitrile from peptide eluates, samples were briefly evaporated in a centrifugal evaporator and then desalted using C18 StageTips as described previously. For enrichment of di-Gly modified peptides, a PTMScan ubiquitin remnant motif kit (Cell Signaling Technology, Danvers, MA) was used. Shortly, 10 mg of peptides eluted from the Sep-Pak cartridge were supplemented with 10× immunoprecipitation buffer provided with the kit, and this was followed by 1 h of centrifugal evaporation at 45 °C in order to remove acetonitrile. The volume was adjusted to result in a 1× immunoprecipitation buffer concentration, and samples were incubated for 4 h at 4 °C with the di-Gly-lysine-specific monoclonal antibody on a rotation wheel as described previously. The immunoprecipitates were washed three times with immunoprecipitation buffer, washed three times with water, and eluted with 0.1% TFA acidified water. Immunoenriched peptides were fractionated using a microtip SCX column prepared as described above. Peptides were eluted through stepwise 100-μl aliquots of SCX buffers of pH 4.5, 5.0, 5.5, 6.0, 7.0, and 8.5 followed by desalting using C18 StageTips as described previously. For the enrichment of phosphorylated peptides, 5 mg of peptides were acidified to a final concentration of 6% TFA and supplemented with acetonitrile to a final concentration of 50%. 10 mg of titanium dioxide beads (10 μm, Titansphere, GL Sciences, Tokyo, Japan) were washed once with 6% TFA, 50% acetonitrile solution, transferred to a tube containing acidified peptides, and incubated for 1 h on a rotating wheel at room temperature. The beads were washed twice with 0.5 ml of 6% TFA in 50% acetonitrile and then twice with 0.5 ml of 0.1% TFA in 50% acetonitrile and transferred onto a C8 packed StageTip. The bound phosphorylated peptides were eluted using 100 μl of 5% NH4OH followed by 100 μl of 10% NH4OH in 25% acetonitrile. The eluates were combined, and ammonia was removed by centrifugal evaporation at 45 °C. The peptides were acidified and loaded onto a microtip SCX column as described above. For the elution of phosphopeptides, buffers with the following pH values were used: 3, 3.5, 4, 5, 7, and 11. Acetonitrile from the eluent was removed by centrifugal evaporation for 15 min at 45 °C followed by desalting using C18 packed StageTips.
LC-MS/MS Analysis
Peptides were eluted from the StageTips using 40 μl of 40% acetonitrile in 0.5% acetic acid solution and analyzed on an EASY-nLC system (Thermo Scientific) connected to a Q-Exactive (Thermo Scientific) mass spectrometer. A 15-cm column of 75-μm diameter packed with 3-μm beads (Reprosil-AQ Pur, Dr. Maisch, Ammerbuch-Entringen, Germany) was used to separate the peptides at a flow rate of 250 nl/min. The liquid was directly electrosprayed using a spray voltage of 2 kV and a heat capillary temperature of 275 °C. The mass spectrometer was operated using Xcalibur 2.2 in the data-dependent acquisition mode with up to 12 of the most intense peaks selected for fragmentation using higher collisional dissociation for all MS/MS events as described previously. In order to avoid repeated sequencing of the same peptides, a dynamic exclusion window of 30 s was used. Full scans were acquired in the m/z range of 300–1750 with a target value of 1e6 ions, a maximum injection time of 120 ms, and r = 70,000 at m/z 400. For the fragmentation spectrum, a maximum of 1e5 ions were selected with an isolation window of 2.5 Da and a minimum signal intensity of 5e4. The resolution was set at r = 17,500 at m/z 400 for whole proteome measurements with a maximum injection time of 64 ms, whereas for phosphoproteome and ubiquitylome measurements r = 35,000 at m/z 400 and a maximum injection time of 128 ms were used. MS/MS peaks with an unknown charge state or a charge state of 1 were not selected. In addition, for di-Gly-modified peptides, charge states of 2 were also excluded.
Computational Analysis of MS Data
Raw mass spectrometry data files were analyzed using MaxQuant version 1.3.3.2 with the integrated Andromeda search engine. Peptides were identified by searching parent ion and fragment spectra against the Saccharomyces Genome Database, genome release r63, containing 6717 putative protein sequences (forward and reversed database supplemented with common contaminants). The initial search was performed using a mass tolerance of 20 ppm and was followed by mass recalibration and the main search with a mass tolerance of 6 ppm for parent ions and 20 ppm (higher collisional dissociation) for fragment ions. Peptide sequences were searched using trypsin specificity and allowing a maximum of two missed cleavages. Cystein carbamidomethylation, cysteine N-ethylmaleimidation, N-acetylation of proteins, and oxidized methionine were search as variable modifications for all raw files, whereas di-Gly modification of lysine and phosphorylation of serine, threonine, and tyrosine were searched as variable modifications where relevant. The false discovery rate was estimated using a target-decoy approach allowing a maximum of 1% false identifications from a reversed sequence database. Only high-confidence sites were considered in this study, defined as those having a localization probability of more than 0.75 for phosphorylated peptides and 0.90 for di-Gly modified peptides, a posterior error probability score less than 0.01, and an Andromeda score difference between the best and second best peptide match of more than 5. MS/MS spectra for proteins identified by a single unique peptide (MS2 PDF proteins), MS/MS spectra for phosphorylated peptides (MS2 PDF phosphorylation), and MS/MS spectra for ubiquitylated peptides (MS2 PDF ubiquitylation) have been provided as supplemental data with references to the unique identification numbers provided in tables for protein groups (supplemental Table S2), phosphorylation sites (supplemental Table S3), and ubiquitylation sites (supplemental Table S5).
Data Analysis
Statistical significance was calculated using the R environment. Gene Ontology (GO) term association and enrichment analysis were performed using the Database for Annotation, Visualization and Integrated Discovery (DAVID). Phosphorylation and di-Gly-modified sites were clustered based on their dynamic behavior using GProx. Amino acid motif enrichment within clusters was analyzed using IceLogo. To construct a protein–protein interaction network, the STRING database system was used. Functional protein interaction networks were visualized using Cytoscape.