ABSTRACT:
Clinical specimens are each inherently unique, limited and non-renewable. As such, small samples such as tissue biopsies are often completely consumed after a limited number of analyses. Here we present a method that enables fast and reproducible conversion of a small amount of tissue (approximating the quantity obtained by a biopsy) into a single, permanent digital file representing the mass spectrometry-measurable proteome of the sample. The method combines pressure cycling technology (PCT) and SWATH mass spectrometry (MS), and the resulting proteome maps can be analyzed, re-analyzed, compared and mined in silico to detect and quantify specific proteins across multiple samples. We used this method to process and convert 18 biopsy samples from 9 renal cell carcinoma patients into SWATH-MS fragment ion maps. From these proteome maps we detected and quantified more than 2,000 proteins with a high degree of reproducibility across all samples. The identified proteins clearly separated tumorous kidney tissues from healthy tissue, and differentiated distinct histomorphological kidney cancer subtypes.
METHODS:
Online Methods
Cells and tissues
U2OS cells were obtained from the American Type Culture Collection, grown in DMEM medium supplemented with 10% bovine serum, washed three times using PBS. Mouse liver tissues were provided by Dr. Nora Roesch in the group of Prof. Markus Stoffel, ETH Zurich, complying with official institutional ethical guidelines. The protocol for mouse tissue was approved by the institutional ethics committee. Tumor specimens were collected at the time of surgery. Nine patients with renal cell carcinoma were included in the study. Tissue samples (tumor and matched kidney tissues) were collected from nephrectomy specimens within 1 hr after surgical removal, snap-frozen and stored at −80 °C. Prior to tissue lysis, histological analysis was performed using haematoxylin-eosin stained frozen sections. Tumor cell content was evaluated by a trained pathologist. All tissue samples were collected at the Institute of Pathology, Kantonsspital St.Gallen. The study protocol was approved by the local ethics committee. Written informed consent had been obtained from each patient prior to tissue collection. Tissues embedded in OCT compounds must be washed prior to PCT-SWATH analysis. The OCT washing can be done following the protocol prepared by Misti Martinez and Kent Shaddox, Vanderbilt-Ingram Cancer Center, which is available on the website of Clinical Proteomic Tumor Analysis Consortium (CPTAC). The url for the protocol is https://cptac-data-portal.georgetown.edu/cptac/dataPublic/list?currentPath=%2FPhase_II_Data%2FOCT%2FOCT_Embedded_Tumor_Tissue_VU&nonav=true. Briefly, tissue is placed in a 1.5 mL microtube and vortexed in the following buffers in sequence: 1) 1 mL 70% ethanol / 30% water for 30 seconds; 2) 1 mL 100% water for 30 seconds; 3) 1 mL 70% ethanol / 30% water for 5 minutes, twice; 4) 1 mL 85% ethanol / 15% water for 5 minutes, twice; 5) 1 mL 100% ethanol for 5 minutes, twice.
PCT-based lysis and digestion
U2OS cell, mouse liver, and human kidney tissues were digested using a Barocycler NEP2320-45k (PressureBioSciences, Inc, South Easton, MA). Cell pellets (cell count range 300,000-900,000) and mechanistically disrupted tissue pieces (weight range: 1-3 mg) were placed in Microtubes (Pressure BioSciences) with lysis buffer consisting of 8 M urea, 0.1 M ammonium bicarbonate, COMPLETE protease inhibitor cocktail (Roche), and PhosSTOP phosphatase inhibitor cocktail (Roche). The solution was sonicated for 20 seconds on ice and placed in the barocycler for tissue lysis and protein extraction at 33 °C. The barocyling process was programmed to contain 60 cycles, each consisting of 50 seconds at 45,000 p.s.i. high and 10 sec at ambient pressure. The protein solution was transferred to new Microtubes for subsequent processes. Tris ( 2 - carboxyethyl ) phosphine and iodoacetamide were simultaneously added to the solution at a final concentration of 10 mM and 40 mM, respectively, followed by a 30-min incubation in the dark with gentle vortexing. The 8 M urea was diluted to 6 M using 0.1 M ammonium bicarbonate. Proteins were first digested using Lys-C (Wako, enzyme-to-substrate ratio 1:40) in the barocycler at 33 °C. The barocycling process was programmed to contain 45 cycles, each consisting of 50 sec at 20,000 p.s.i. and 10 seconds at ambient pressure. Tryptic digestion was then performed after diluting the urea concentration to 1.6 M using 0.1 M ammonium bicarbonate. Trypsin (Promega) was used with an enzyme-to-substrate ratio of 1:20. Tryptic digestion was performed in the barocycler at 33 °C using 90 cycles of 50 sec at 20,000 p.s.i. and 10 sec at ambient pressure. Subsequently, trifluoroacetic acid was added to the solution at a final concentration of 0.4% to stop digestion. The peptides were cleaned using SEP-PAK C18 cartridges (Waters Corp., Milford, MA), dried under vacuum, and stored in −80°C before MS analysis. Peptides were dissolved in HPLC grade water containing 0.1% formic acid and 2% acetonitrile. To facilitate peptide solubilization, peptide solution was sonicated in an icy water bath for 5 min. Peptide concentration was measured using NanoDrop 1000 spectrophotometer with the option of Protein A280 (1Ab = 1 mg mL−1). Peptide concentration was adjusted to 0.3 μg μl−1 using 0.1% formic acid / 2% acetonitrile in HPLC water. One microliter of iRT peptide cocktail  (Biognosis, Zurich, Switzerland) was spiked into every nine microliter of peptide sample prior to LC-MS analysis.
Orbitrap MS analysis
The peptide samples were analyzed on an LTQ Orbitrap XL mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific) using Xcalibur version 2.0.7 coupled to an Eksigent NanoLC-2D HPLC nanoflow system (dual pump system with one analytical column; Eksigent) via a nanoelectrospray ion source using a liquid junction (Thermo Scientific), as described previously . The raw data were converted to mzXML format and searched using Sorcerer against a target-decoy Swissprot mouse protein database. False discovery rate was controlled below 1% using Trans Proteomic Pipeline (TPP, v 4.6.1).
Triple-TOF MS analysis in DDA and SWATH mode
A 5600 TripleTOF mass spectrometer (AB Sciex, Concord, Canada) and an Eksigent 1D+ Nano LC systems (Eksigent, Dublin, CA) were employed for SWATH-MS analysis. The LC gradient was formulated with a buffer A (2% acetonitrile and 0.1% formic acid in HPLC water) and buffer B (2% water and 0.1% formic acid in acetonitrile). The analytical column (75 μm × 20 cm) was home-packed directly in a fused silica PicoTip emitter (New Objective, Woburn, MA, USA) with 3 μm 200 Å Magic C18 AQ resin (Michrom BioResources, Auburn, CA, USA). The peptide samples were prepared at 0.3 μg μL−1 spiked-in with 1:20 (v:v) iRT peptides. Three microliters of each sample were injected and separated with a linear gradient of 2% buffer B to 35% buffer B over 120 min at a flow rate of 0.3 μl min−1. The column was then flushed with 90% buffer B for 5 min, and re-equilibrated with 2% buffer B for 10 min. For shotgun experiments the TripleTOF mass spectrometer was operated with a “top20” method. From the 500 milliseconds survey scan (TOF-MS), the top 20 most intense precursor ions were selected for subsequent automated MS/MS in measurements where each MS/MS event consisted of a 150 milliseconds scan. The selection criteria for parent ions included intensity, where ions had to be greater than 200 counts per second, a charge state greater than 2+. The precursors that were selected for fragmentation were added to a dynamic exclusion list for 20 s. Ions were isolated using a quadrupole resolution of 0.7 amu and fragmented in the collision cell using the collision energy equation (0.0625 × m/z - 3.5) with an additional collision energy spread of 15 eV within the 150 milliseconds accumulation time to mimic SWATH fragmentation conditions. In the instances where there were ≤ 20 parent ions per survey scan which met the selection criteria, those ions were subjected to extended MS/MS accumulation times to maintain a constant total cycle time of 3.5 s. For SWATH-MS based experiments the mass spectrometer was operated in a looped product ion mode. In this mode the instrument was specifically tuned to allow a quadrupole resolution of 25 amu per mass selection. The stability of the mass selection was maintained by the operation of the RF and DC voltages on the isolation quadrupole in an independent manner as described earlier. Using an isolation width of 25 amu, a set of 32 overlapping windows (1 amu overlap) was constructed covering the mass range 400 to 1,200 amu. The collision energy for each window was determined based on the collision energy for a 2+ ion centered in the respective window (equation: 0.0625 × m/z - 3.5) with a collision energy spread of 15 eV. An accumulation time of 100 milliseconds was used for each fragment ion scan and for the survey scans acquired at the beginning of each cycle, resulting in a total cycle time of 3.3 sec. The sequential precursor isolation window set-up was as follows: 500-425, 424-450, 449-475, … ,1174-1200, with an effective (100%) transmission of ~ 25 Da and ~ 0.3 Da attrition on either side of the isolation window.
Kidney tissue SWATH assay library generation
A pool of the 18 kidney tissue samples used for SWATH analysis was resolved into 15 gel fractions using SDS-PAGE and digested individually in-gel. The peptides extracted from each gel band were subjected to DDA analysis in TripleTOF MS. The individual digests of whole proteome of the 18 kidney tissues were also analyzed in TripleTOF in DDA mode. iRT peptides were spiked in to these samples at a concentration of 10% prior to LC-MS analysis.
All 33 DDA data files were searched for peptide identification using X!Tandem  and OMSSA  against a target-decoy non-redundant human UniProtKB/SwissProt protein database (Oct 1, 2013) containing 20265 protein sequences and the iRT peptide sequences. The decoy sequences were generated by reversing each of the target sequences. Fully tryptic peptides with maximal 2 missed cleavages were allowed. The mass tolerance of parent mass was set to 50 ppm. Fragment mass tolerance was set at 0.1 Da. Carbamidomethyl at cysteine was set as static modification, and oxidation at methionine was set as variable modification. Search results from X!Tandem and OMSSA were further analyzed through Trans-Proteomic Pipeline (TPP, v4.6.0)  using PeptideProphet and iProphet. The cutoff of probability for peptides was 0.9. The resultant pep.xml files were combined into a single file named as interact.pep.xml.
SpectraST (version 4.0) in TPP and a previously described workflow  were used to process the resulting interact.pep.xml file, to normalize the retention time, to generate consensus spectra and to produce the TraML library file following the commands below:
spectrast -c_BIN! -cf’Protein!~DECOY’ -cP0.9 -cICID-QTOF -cNstep1 interact.pep.xml
spectrast2spectrast_irt.py -i step1.splib -o step2.splib
spectrast -cAC -c_BIN! -cf’Protein!~iRT’ -cNstep3 step2.splib
spectrast2tsv.py -l 400,2000 -s b,y -x 1,2,3,4 -o 6 -n 6 -p 0.05 -e -w swaths.txt -k openswath -a step4.tsv step3.splib
mv step4.tsv step4.csv (move step4.tsv step4.csv in windows)
ConvertTSVTTraML -in step4.csv -out step5.TraML
OpenSwathDecoyGenerator -in step5.TraML -out final.TraML-min_transitions 3 -max_transitions 6 -method shuffle -append -exclude_similar
All the tools used here are available under the modified BSD license at http://www.openswath.org/ and https://code.google.com/p/msproteomicstools. Documentation for OpenSWATH and a detailed protocol for SWATH assay library generation is available . In our laboratory, the entire pipeline was streamlined as an iPortal workflow .
SWATH data analysis
SWATH wiff files were converted into mzXML files using ProteoWizard msconvert  v.3.0.3316. A Python script (fix_swath_windows.py) was used to correct precursor isolation-window mass error introduced by msconvert as described previously. The mzXML file was converted to mzML file using OpenMS tool FileConverter . OpenSWATH was performed using the tool OpenSWATHWorkflow with input files including the mzXML file, the TraML library file, and TraML file for iRT peptides . The assays were identified with a false discovery rate below 0.1%. High confidence peptide features from different samples were aligned using the algorithm TRansition of Identification Confidence (TRIC) (version r238) (Roest, HL, et al, in preparation), which is available from https://pypi.python.org/pypi/msproteomicstools or https://code.google.com/p/msproteomicstools. The following parameters for the feature_alignment.py follows: max_rt_diff=30, method=global_best_overall, nr_high_conf_exp=2, target_fdr=0.001, use_score_filter=1.
Label-free protein-level quantification was performed using the function ProteinInference from the R package aLFQ (version 1.3.1)  on output from OpenSWATH. The parameters differ from the default for ProteinInference were:
peptide_method=“top”,peptide_topx=3,transition_topx=5,consensus_proteins=FALSE, consensus_peptides=FALSE, consensus_transitions=FALSE.
The mass spectrometry proteomics data and SWATH assay library have been deposited to the ProteomeXchange Consortium (http://www.proteomexchange.org) via the PRIDE partner repository  with the dataset identifier PXD000672.
Statistical analysis
The protein expression values were subjected to the arcsinh variance stabilizing transformation and the effect was assessed by the Bland Altman diagnostic plot. We corrected for systematic differences in expression levels between the samples using the quantile normalization . Missing values were excluded from calculation of CV values, but considered as 0 in heatmap generation and t-test. Variation analysis of the RCC SWATH data was performed by comparing quantified proteins between each pair of SWATH data sets taking into account all combinations. The median CV of all proteins was plotted using R package vioplot. The MS injection variation analysis considered 18 pairs of data sets. The within-patient variation analysis of all RCC and ccRCC considered 36 and 24 pairs of data sets, respectively. Regarding inter-patient variation analysis in all RCC patients, one data set was sampled from each of the 9 patients and pooled for variation analysis. For all RCC tissues, altogether 262,144 combinations were analyzed. 512 combinations were included for non-tumorous and tumorous tissues from all RCC patients. Variation analysis of ccRCC was based on 4,096 combinations of ccRCC data sets, and 64 combinations of non-tumorous or tumorous ccRCC data sets. Heatmaps and violin plots were plotted using R. P values in the volcano plots were calculated using paired or un-paired two-tailed t-test as indicated in the respective legend.
References for Online Methods