ABSTRACT:
Ferritin heavy chain (FTH1) is a 21-kDa subunit of the ferritin complex, known for its role in iron metabolism, and which has recently been identified as a favorable prognostic protein for triple negative breast cancer (TNBC) patients. Currently, it is not well understood how FTH1 contributes to an anti-tumor response. Here, we explored whether expression and cellular compartmentalization of FTH1 correlates to an effective immune response in TNBC patients. Analysis of the tumor tissue transcriptome, complemented with in silico pathway analysis, revealed that FTH1 was an integral part of an immunomodulatory network of cytokine signaling, adaptive immunity, and cell death. These findings were confirmed using mass spectrometry (MS)-derived proteomic data, and immunohistochemical staining of tissue microarrays. We observed that FTH1 is localized in both the cytoplasm and/or nucleus of cancer cells. However, high cytoplasmic (c) FTH1 was associated with favorable prognosis (Log-rank p = 0.001), whereas nuclear (n) FTH1 staining was associated with adverse prognosis (Log-rank p = 0.019). cFTH1 staining significantly correlated with total FTH1 expression in TNBC tissue samples, as measured by MS analysis (Rs = 0.473, p = 0.0007), but nFTH1 staining did not (Rs = 0.197, p = 0.1801). Notably, IFN γ-producing CD8+ effector T cells, but not CD4+ T cells, were preferentially enriched in tumors with high expression of cFTH1 (p = 0.02). Collectively, our data provide evidence toward new immune regulatory properties of FTH1 in TNBC, which may facilitate development of novel therapeutic targets.
METHODS:
EXPERIMENTAL PROCEDURES
Transcriptomic and Proteomic Data Sets
Transcriptomic and proteomic data sets used in this study were previously published and can be accessed from public databases. The gene expression profiling data of 63 TNBC samples were extracted from publically available data set (Accession number: GSE2034, GSE5327). The global nLC-MS/MS data of 126 TNBC samples are available in ProteomeXchange database (Accession number: PXD000260). A total of 47 samples were measured by both gene expression and nLC-MS/MS profiling.
Functional Analysis
Gene set enrichment analysis (GSEA) was performed on gene expression data of all the 63 samples searched against TNBC subtype database (supplemental Table S1) constructed based on previously reported findings and the Molecular Signatures Database (MSigDB) (version 3.1). False discovery rates (FDRs) of enriched pathways were estimated based on 1,000 time permutation on defined phenotypes with fixed 149 seeds. Multiple probes assigned to the same gene were collapsed into single gene expression using the probes with the highest expression value for every tested sample. Genes were ranked using Student's t test when gene sets were compared between good and poor prognostic samples (dichotomized phenotype), and using Pearson correlation when gene sets were associated with expression of FTH1 (continuous phenotype). In accordance with previous findings, a less stringent cutoff of FDR<0.60 was used to enrich for biological pathways because of the batch effects of the two data set and intrinsic heterogeneity of TNBC.
We visualized the results of Gene Set Enrichment Analysis from the gene expression data analyzed using EnrichmentMap software. Permissive p value cutoff of 0.05 and FDR cutoff of 0.25 were applied with MSigDB (version 3.1) for the visualization, according to the online user guide (http://baderlab.org/Software/EnrichmentMap/UserManual).
To visualize gene and protein interaction map, we selected genes and proteins of which the expression significantly correlate with expression of FTH1 with a p value cutoff of 0.01 (Spearman's rank correlation) in transcriptomic and proteomic data sets, respectively. Subsequently, the gene list with corresponding correlation coefficients were submitted to IPA Knowledge Base using Ingenuity System (version 18030641), whereas protein interaction maps were visualized via STRING (version 9.1). Correlation heat maps were created with an unsupervised hierarchical method with Euclidean distance and complete linkage using Cluster (version 3.0).
Clustering Analysis of Proteomic Data Set
nLC-MS/MS data set normalized by “Combat” algorithm was used for clustering analysis. Proteins of “IFN γ pathway” (interferon gamma), “L1 pathway” (recycling of the cell adhesion molecular L1), “antigen presentation pathway,” and “apoptosis pathway” were clustered using an unsupervised hierarchical method with Euclidean distance and complete linkage. Based on heat map patterns, three clusters were defined for each pathway with high, medium or low expression values. These clusters were stratified with use of survival analyses in order to evaluate the association between pathways and patient prognosis.
Sample Selection
A tissue microarray (TMA) was constructed from a cohort of 412 primary TNBC tissues from local tissue bank. Triple negativity of formalin-fixed paraffin-embedded tissues was confirmed by IHC staining of ESR1, PGR and ERBB2. When IHC staining of ERBB2 protein was scored as 2+, fluorescence in situ hybridization (Dako Denmark A/S, Glostrup, Denmark) was used to assess amplification of the corresponding gene. For inclusion into the final analysis, we followed the same criteria as described in our previous study: All tissues were obtained from patients with negative lymph-node status, who did not receive systemic adjuvant therapy (n = 191). Twenty-six patients who had no distant metastasis were excluded because of insufficient time of clinical follow-up (<60 months). Of those patients who developed metastatic disease within 5 years after surgical removal of primary tumors, some patients (n = 10) had local relapse prior to distant metastasis. These patients were excluded from this study to limit the potential influence of local relapse on distant metastasis. An additional 8 tissues were excluded because of poor tissue quality. Therefore, a total of 147 samples were eligible for this study, including 39 poor prognostic patients who developed distant metastasis within 5 years after surgical removal of primary tumor. A subset of 48 samples were used for nLC-MS/MS profiling in our previous study. Therefore, this study can be defined as verification and pre-validation of TNBC biomarker FTH1. A detailed characterization of these 147 samples is available in Table I.
This study was approved by the Medical Ethics Committee of the Erasmus Medical Center Rotterdam, The Netherlands (MEC 02.953) and was performed in accordance to the Code of Conduct of the Federation of Medical Scientific Societies in The Netherlands, and wherever possible we adhered to the Reporting Recommendations for Tumor Marker Prognostic Studies (REMARK).
IHC Staining
IHC staining was performed with the above-described TMA of TNBC tissues. All tumor tissues on this TMA were evaluated by a dedicated pathologist (C.H.M.v.D.) to assess histologic tumor subtype and grade according to Bloom and Richardson. Each tissue in the TMA was prepared in biological triplicates from three invasive tumor regions based on hematoxylin and eosin staining of whole tissue sections. Tissue sections of 4 μm were incubated for 1 h at room temperature with anti-FTH1 antibody at a dilution of 1:100 against residues near the C terminus of the protein (rabbit-anti-human monoclonal antibody, clone name: EPR3005Y, GeneTex Inc., Irvine, CA, USA). Antigen retrieval was performed prior to antibody incubation by heating the slides for 40 min at 95 °C and washing with Dako retrieval solution (pH = 6) (DakoCytomation, Carpinteria, CA, USA) when the slides were cooled down to room temperature. Staining was visualized by anti-mouse EnVision+® System-HRP (DAB) (DakoCytomation). Cytoplasmic (c) and nuclear (n) FTH1 stainings were separately scored as percentages of positive invasive tumor cells (6 categories: ≤1%, 2–10%, 11–25%, 26–50%, 51–75%, >75%) by two independent observers. Average scores of biological triplicates were recorded for statistical analysis.
Next, tissue sections were prepared from 30 samples that represent different staining patterns of FTH1 on our TMA. Each of these sections was stained with anti-FTH1, -CD3, -CD4 and -CD8 antibodies. Anti-CD3 (rabbit-anti-human polyclonal antibody) and anti-CD8 (mouse-anti-human monoclonal antibody, clone name: C8/C144B) were purchased from Dako Denmark A/S (Glostrup, Denmark). Ready-to-use anti-CD4 antibody was purchased from Ventana (rabbit-anti-human monoclonal antibody, clone name: SP35, Ventana medical systems Inc., Tucson, AZ, USA). IHC staining of CD8 was performed with anti-CD8 antibody at a dilution of 1:100 and washed in a retrieval solution at pH = 9 for 40 min at room temperature. The rest of the protocol was the same as described for FTH1 staining. Slides were incubated with anti-CD3 antibody at a dilution of 1:150 for 32 min, and with ready-to-use anti-CD4 antibody for 16 min at room temperature. Antigen retrieval prior to CD3 and CD4 stainings was performed by heating slides for 64 min at 97 °C and washing with Tris-EDTA solution (pH = 8.4) when the slides were cooled down to room temperature. Staining was visualized by discoveryTM universal secondary antibody (Ventana, Ventana medical systems Inc., Tucson, AZ, USA). FTH1 staining on whole tissue sections was scored following the same method as used for TMA. CD3 was scored in density of positive staining cells, and CD4 and CD8 were scored as CD4/CD8 ratio. The density of CD4 and CD8 markers was calculated using the formula: density of CD4+ and CD8+ T-lymphocytes = density of CD3+ T-lymphocytes × percentage of CD4+ and CD8+ T-lymphocytes. All slides were scored by two independent observers, of whom one was a pathologist (C.H.M.v.D.).
Statistical Analysis
Univariate and multivariate Cox regression analyses were performed using Stata software (version 12.0). Hazard ratios (HR) and the corresponding 95% confidence interval (CI) were calculated based on stratified groups of patients. Kaplan-Meier analyses were performed using Stata software (version 12.0) and GraphPad Prism 5 (version 5.01). Based on visual observation of Kaplan-Meier curves, optimal cutoffs of cFTH1 and nFTH1 staining were determined for reporting. Nonparametric Spearman correlation and Wilcoxon rank-sum test were used for analyzing IHC staining data.