ABSTRACT:
Fuchs’ endothelial corneal dystrophy (FECD) is a major corneal disorder affecting the innermost part of the cornea, leading to visual impairment. As the morphological changes in FECD are mainly observed in the extracellular matrix of the Descemet’s membrane/endothelial layer, we determined the protein profiles of diseased and control tissues using two relative quantitation MS methods. The first quantitation method, based on the areas of the extracted ion chromatograms, quantified the 51 and 48 most abundant proteins of the Descemet’s membrane/endothelial layer in patient and control tissues, respectively, of which 10 were significantly regulated. The results indicated that the level of type VIII collagen was unaltered even though the protein previously has been shown to be implicated in familial early-onset forms of the disease. Using the second relative quantitation method, iTRAQ, we identified 22 differentially regulated proteins, many of which are extracellular proteins known to be involved in proper assembly of the basement membrane in other tissues. In total, 26 differentially regulated proteins were identified, of which 6 proteins were regulated in both methods. These results support that the morphological changes observed in FECD are caused in part by an aberrant assembly of the extracellular matrix within the Descemet’s membrane/endothelial layer.
METHODS:
Experimental Procedures
FECD and Control Tissue
Tissue samples were obtained from late-onset FECD patients undergoing endothelial keratoplasty with transplantation of a donor Descemet’s membrane with endothelium. Upon surgical removal of the diseased Descemet’s membrane/endothelial layer, the tissue was immediately stored at −80 °C until further processing. A total of 10 FECD tissue samples were collected comprising five females and five males with an average age of 72.5 years (min 56 years, max 83 years). As controls, complementary non-FECD tissue (secondary bullous keratopathy) isolated by the same technique as for the FECD tissue from four female patients with an average age of 69 years (min 51 years, max 88 years) were included. The tissue was obtained and used for scientific purpose, and ethical issues have been handled according to Danish healthcare law, and after guidance from the local ethical committee and national health authorities, and in accordance with the Declaration of Helsinki.
Sample Preparation for LC–MS/MS: In-Solution Digest
Patient and control tissues were lyophilized for 10 h using a speedvac concentrator before subjection to 0.66 M CNBr in 70% trifluoroacetic acid at 23 °C. The next day, the tissues were lyophilized and resuspended in 8 M urea in 0.2 M Tris-HCl, pH 8.3, reduced in 15 mM dithiothreitol for 1 h, and alkylated in 30 mM iodoacetamide for 1 h. The samples were diluted 5 times in 0.1 M Tris-HCl, pH 8.3, and digested overnight with 1:50 w/w sequencing grade modified trypsin (Promega, Madison, WI, USA) at 37 °C for 16 h at room temperature in a final volume of 0.5 mL. The samples were desalted using POROS 50 R2 RP column material (Applied Biosystems, Foster City, CA, USA) packed in GELoader Tips (Eppendorf, Hamburg, Germany).
Amino Acid Analysis
Concentrations of the in-solution digested samples were determined by amino acid analysis: 5 μL of each sample was dried in 500-μL polypropylene vials that were placed in 22-mL glass vials (Wheaton, Millville, NJ, USA). A total of 200 μL of hydrolysis buffer (6 N HCl, 0.1% phenol, 0.1% thioglycolic acid) was placed at the bottom of the glass vial, which was subsequently purged with argon, closed with a MiniInert valve (Pierce, Rockford, IL, USA), and evacuated to <5 mbar. The samples were then heated to 110 °C for 20 h, dried and redissolved in loading buffer pH 2.20 containing 1 nmol NorLeu, and injected on a BioChrom 31 amino acid analyzer. The resulting data were analyzed by an in-house program AAA ver. 1.03, which calculates protein composition and total protein amount and corrects for intensity changes of ninhydrin.
iTRAQ Labeling and Strong Cation-Exchange Fractionation
Isobaric tags for relative and absolute quantification (iTRAQ) analysis was performed using 10 μg of in-solution digested sample from each patient and control. Samples were labeled with iTRAQ 4plex (AB SCIEX, Framingham, MA, USA) according to the manufacturer’s protocol, resulting in a total of five sets of 4plex experiments (Figure 1). A mixed sample containing 5 μg of sample from each of the patients and controls was labeled with the iTRAQ 114-tag in all five experiments and used to normalize between experiments. Each 4plex experiment was diluted 10 times in buffer A (0.5% formic acid and 5% acetonitrile) and separated on a Higgins Analytical strong cation exchange (SCX) column (PL-SCX 1000 Å 5 μm 20 × 2.1 mm column, Higgins Analytical, Rengstorff, CA, USA) equilibrated in buffer A and connected to an Ettan LC system (GE Healthcare, Wauwatosa, WI, USA). The peptides were eluted using a 100 μL/min flow rate and a 1% B/min linear gradient from buffer A to buffer B (buffer B containing 1 M NaCl). The 15 collected fractions were lyophilized, redissolved in 100 μL 0.1% formic acid, and desalted using POROS 50 R2 material packed in GELoader tips. The desalted samples were lyophilized and resuspended in 12 μL 0.1% formic acid and stored at −20 °C.
LC–MS/MS Analysis
LC–MS/MS analyses were performed on an EASY-nLC II system (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA) connected to a TripleTOF 5600 mass spectrometer (AB SCIEX, Framingham, MA, USA) equipped with a NanoSpray III source (AB SCIEX, Framingham, MA, USA) and operated under Analyst TF 1.6.0 control. The CNBr and trypsin cleaved samples were dissolved in 0.1% formic acid, injected and trapped on a Biosphere C18 column (5 μm, 2 cm × 100 μm i.d.; Nano Separations, Nieuwkoop, Netherlands). Next, the peptides were eluted from the trap column and separated on a 15 cm analytical column (75 μm i.d.) packed in-house in a fritted silica tip (New Objectives, Woburn, MA, USA) with RP ReproSil-Pur C18-AQ 3 μm resin (Dr. Maisch GmbH, Ammerbuch-Entringen, Germany) connected in-line to the mass spectrometer. Peptides were eluted at a flow rate of 250 nL/min using a 50 min gradient from 5% to 35% phase B (0.1% formic acid and 90% acetonitrile). The acquisition method used for the area-based extracted ion chromatogram (XIC) quantification methods was set up as an information-dependent acquisition (IDA) experiment collecting up to 25 MS/MS spectra in each 1.6 s cycle using an exclusion window of 6 s. For iTRAQ experiments, the IDA settings were changed to 50 MS/MS per cycle and a 2.8 s cycle time. Two iTRAQ experiments were performed on each 4plex with iTRAQ collision energy adjustment either enabled or disabled.
Quantitation Based on Areas of the Extracted Ion Chromatograms (XIC)
All MS files were processed using Skyline v. 2.1.0.4936 (MacCoss Lab, University of Washington). The MS files were converted to Mascot generic format (MGF) using the AB SCIEX MS Data Converter beta 1.3 (AB SCIEX) and the “proteinpilot MGF” parameters. The peak lists were used to interrogate the Swiss-Prot (v. 2013_11, 541,762 sequences) Homo sapiens (20,279 sequences) database using Mascot 2.3.02 (Matrix science, London, U.K.). Trypsin was selected as the digestion enzyme allowing one missed cleavage. Carbamidomethyl was entered as a fixed modification, whereas hydroxylation of proline residues was allowed as variable modification. The data were searched with a mass tolerance of the precursor and product ions of 10 ppm and 0.2 Da using ESI-QUAD-TOF as the instrument setting. The significance threshold (p) was set at 0.01, and the ion score expect cutoff at 0.005. Mascot dat result files were used to generate a spectral library in Skyline using the human sequences from Swiss-Prot as background proteome. Employing the same parameters as for the Mascot search, the three most abundant peptides for each protein were manually chosen from all peptides available in the spectral library except methionine-containing peptides. Proteins identified with less than 3 peptides were not included in XIC. In addition, only peptides quantified with an idotp value of ≥90 were included for area-based XIC quantification. This label-free quantification protocol relied on the average MS signal (area) response for the three most intense tryptic peptides in each protein. The relative abundance and standard deviation of proteins quantified in a minimum of three of the technical replicates was calculated as the average MS intensity (area) for the three peptides for each protein divided by the sum of the average signal (area) for all quantified proteins in the sample. A Student’s t test (p = 0.05) was applied to test the area-based XIC data for significantly regulated proteins between the FECD and control groups. The Student’s t test and average protein amounts were calculated only on proteins quantified in a minimum of six patients in the FECD group and a minimum of three individuals in the control group.
iTRAQ Quantification
The collected iTRAQ MS files were converted to Mascot generic format (MGF) using the AB SCIEX MS Data Converter beta 1.3 (AB SCIEX, Framingham, MA, USA) and the “proteinpilot MGF” parameters. Each peak list for the two iTRAQ experiments with different collision settings were merged and searched against the Swiss-Prot (version 2013_11) Homo sapiens (20,279 sequences) database using Mascot 2.3.02 (Matrix Science, London, UK). Trypsin was employed as digestion enzyme allowing one missed cleavage. Carbamidomethyl was entered as a fixed modification, hydroxylation of proline was entered as a variable modification, and all methionine-containing peptides were ignored. The mass tolerance of the precursor and product ions were 10 ppm and 0.2 Da, the instrument setting was specified as ESI-QUAD-TOF, and the iTRAQ 4plex protocol was selected as quantitation method. The significance threshold (p) was set at 0.01, the ion score expect cutoff at 0.005, and all iTRAQ ratios were normalized based on summed intensities. Mascot iTRAQ results were parsed using MS Data Miner v. 1.2.2, and only proteins quantified with a minimum of 3 unique peptides were used for further analysis. To find significantly regulated proteins, a Student’s t test with a significant threshold of 0.05 was performed for all proteins quantified in more than half of the biological replicates from each group (FECD and Controls) (Supplementary Table 2).