ABSTRACT:
Brain transcriptome and connectome maps are being generated, but an equivalent effort on the proteome is currently lacking. We performed high-resolution mass spectrometry-based proteomics for in-depth analysis of the mouse brain and its major brain regions and cell types. Comparisons of the 12,934 identified proteins in oligodendrocytes, astrocytes, microglia and cortical neurons with deep sequencing data of the transcriptome indicated deep coverage of the proteome. Cell type-specific proteins defined as tenfold more abundant than average expression represented about a tenth of the proteome, with an over representation of cell surface proteins. To demonstrate the utility of our resource, we focused on this class of proteins and identified Lsamp, an adhesion molecule of the IgLON family, as a negative regulator of myelination. Our findings provide a framework for a system-level understanding of cell-type diversity in the CNS and serves as a rich resource for analyses of brain development and function.
METHODS:
Methods
Methods and any associated references are available in the online version of the paper.
Accession codes. All proteomics data for each individual proteome sample from different cell types and brain regions are available at the ProteomeXchange Consortium (http://proteomecentral.proteomexchange.org/) via the PRIDE partner repository with the data set identifier PXD001250.
Note: Any Supplementary Information and Source Data files are available in the online version of the paper
Online Methods
Tissue preparation, cell culture and cell isolation
All animal experiments were performed according to the Lower Saxony State regulations for animal experimentation. Brain regions were dissected from P60 male C57BL/6 mice using a ‘rodent brain matrix’ 1-mm coronal slicer (ASI Instruments) according to coordinates obtained from the Mouse Brain Library (http://www.mbl.org/) using the C57BL/6J atlas as reference. The preparation of primary cell cultures was performed according to previously described protocol with modifications. Briefly, brains were removed from newborn mice (P1) were separated by midline incision and transferred into Hanks Buffered saline solution (HBSS). Under a dissection microscope, the meninges were removed and the hindbrains were discarded. A total of five brains were pooled and incubated with 0.25% trypsin/EDTA (wt/vol) at 37 °C for 10 min. The tissues were washed twice with BME growth medium (supplemented with 10% fetal calf serum (FCS, vol/vol), GlutaMAX, penicillin and streptomcyin) and further dissociated by trituration (ten times) using a glass pipette. The cell suspension was passed through a cell sieve and subsequently plated onto 5 PLL-coated cell culture flasks with BME growth medium. Two thirds of the growth medium was exchanged twice a week. 10 d after plating the glial mixed cultures, microglia were removed by gentle, manual shaking, leaving a culture that consisting of OPCs on top of a confluent layer of astrocytes. The next day, OPCs were shaken off by hand and pelleted by centrifugation. The OPC-pellet was re-suspended in Super Sato differentiation medium (high-glucose DMEM with B27-supplement, 1% horse serum (vol/vol), 110 ag ml-1 sodium pyruvate, 0.5 nM tri-iodo-thyronin, 0.5 μM L-thyroxin, GlutaMAX and penicillin/streptomycin). The OPC suspension was transferred into an untreated cell culture dish and incubated at 37 °C for 3 min. During this time, contaminating microglia and astrocytes adhered to the culture dish, while OPCs remained in suspension. This step was repeated a second time, to yield highly pure OPC cultures. These cells were plated in an appropriate cell number onto PLL-coated cell culture dishes or glass cover slips with Super Sato. The day of OPC plating was defined as DIV-0 and cells were harvested for experiments at the subsequent days. After shaking off the OPCs, fresh DMEM (supplemented with 10% FCS, GlutaMAX, penicillin and streptomycin) was added to the remaining astrocytes and the cells were allowed to recover for 72 h. The astrocytes were then harvested for further experiments. The purity of these cells was determined separately by trypsination, seeding onto PLL-coated cover-slips and immunostaining after 48 h. The preparation of microglia was performed as described previously. In brief, glial mixed cultures were treated with microglia colony stimulating factor (MCSF) to enhance microglia proliferation. After 3 d, microglia were harvested by gentle shaking and seeded onto PLL-coated cell culture dishes with DMEM (supplemented with 10% FCS, GlutaMAX, penicillin and streptomycin). After another 3 d, cells were used for experiments. Cortical neuron cultures were prepared from embryonic mice at E16.5 as described with minor modifications. Pregnant mice were killed by cervical dislocation and opened to reveal the embryos. The embryos were decapitated; the brains were exposed by a midline incision and transferred into HBSS. Meninges were stripped from the surface of the brain and hindbrain was discarded. Three brains were pooled, treated with 0.25% trypsin/EDTA for 10 min and washed with neuronal growth medium (MEM with B27-supplement, 0.6% glucose (wt/vol), 0.22% bicarbonate (wt/vol), pyruvate, GlutaMAX, penicillin and streptomycin). Cells were plated onto PLL-coated cell culture dishes with neuronal medium. After 16 h, cytosine arabinoside (AraC) was added in a final concentration of 4 μM. The addition was repeated the second day after plating. The third day, AraC was washed out and cells were cultivated in neuronal growth medium until day 5, 10 and 16, respectively.
For acute cell isolation, cells were isolated using the MACS cell selection kit (Miltenyi Biotec). Briefly, brains from mice at P8 were isolated, minced and mechanically dissociated with the gentleMACS dissociator according to the manufacturer instructions. The cells were then passed through a 45-μm strainer and incubated with the cell-specific beads for 15 min. The cells were then loaded on LS columns and separated on a quadroMACS magnet. The target cells were washed once in phosphate-buffered saline (PBS), then pelleted and snap-frozen. The remaining cells were collected for the isolation of the other cell population.
Sample preparation for mass spectrometric analysis
Cells were lysed in a buffer consisting of 0.1 M Tris-HCl, pH 8.0, 0.1 M DTT, and 2% SDS (wt/vol) at 99 °C for 5 min. The lysates were sonicated using a Branson type sonicator and protein content was determined using a Fluorescence Spectrometer. 100 ag of protein was subjected to chloroform methanol precipitation and the proteins were digested with LysC and trypsin according to the standard protocol. After desalting on StageTips, digested peptides were subjected to either fractionation or single-shot analysis as indicated in Figure 1. 25 μg of the digested peptides were separated into six fractions using strong anion exchange (SAX) according to the previously described pipette tip protocol. For single-shot analysis digested peptide samples were directly analyzed without any fractionation.
Lc MS/MS analysis
MS analysis was performed using Q Exactive mass spectrometers (Thermo Fisher Scientific) coupled on-line to a nanoflow UHPLC instrument (Easy nLC, Thermo Fisher Scientific). Eluted peptides were separated over a 240-min gradient on a reverse phase 50-cm-long C18 column (75-μm inner diameter, ReproSil-Pur C18-AQ 1.8 ¡am beads (GmbH)). The survey scans (300-1,700 m/z, target value 3E6, maximum ion injection times 20 ms) were acquired and followed by higher energy collisional dissociation (HCD) based fragmentation (normalized collision energy 25). For measurements in Q Exactive mass spectrometers, a resolution of 70,000 at m/z 400 was used for survey scans and up to ten dynamically chosen most abundant precursor ions were fragmented (isolation window 1.6 m/z). The MS/MS scans were acquired at a resolution of 17,000 at m/z 400 (target value 1E6, maximum ion injection times 60 ms). For survey scans in Q Exactive HF, a resolution of 60,000 at m/z 200 was used and up to 15 dynamically chosen most abundant precursor ions were fragmented (isolation window 1.6 m/z). The MS/MS scans were acquired at a resolution of 15,000 at m/z 200 (target value 1E5, maximum ion injection times 25 ms).
MS data analysis
Mass spectra were processed using the MaxQuant computational platform versions 1.5.2.1, 1.5.0.8 and 1.3.9.21. The spectra were searched by the Andromeda search engine against the mouse Uniprot sequence database. The search included cysteine carbamidomethylation as a fixed modification and N-acetylation of protein and oxidation of methionine as variable modifications. Peptides with minimum of seven amino-acid length were considered and the required FDR was set to 1% at the peptide and protein level. Where possible, peptide identification were transferred based on accurate mass and retention times across liquid chromatography (LC)-MS runs to obtain peptide identity in cases where the precursor peptides were present in MS1 but not selected for fragmentation and identification by MS2 in given run. This matching between runs is a feature in the MaxQuant software. For single run analysis of brain and cerebellum, matching was done against the library of the deep brain proteome composed of fractionated and single shot runs (Supplementary Table 2). Otherwise fractionated samples and single shot runs were matched within themselves (Supplementary Table 1). Protein identification required at least one unique or razor peptide per protein group. Quantification in MaxQuant was performed using the label free quantification (LFQ) algorithm. Briefly, MaxLFQ is an intensity determination and normalization procedure that is fully compatible with any peptide or protein separation before LC-MS analysis. Given that the presence of quantifiable pep-tides varies from sample to sample, the algorithm uses only common peptides for pair-wise ratio determination for each protein and calculates a median ratio to protect against outliers. It then determines all pair-wise protein ratios and requires a minimal number of two peptide ratios for a given protein ratio to be considered valid. A least-squares analysis is then performed to reconstruct the abundance profile before rescaling the whole profile to the cumulative intensity across samples. This step preserves the total summed intensity for a protein over all samples. This procedure is repeated for all proteins, resulting in an accurate abundance profile for each protein across the samples.
The mass spectrometry proteomics data have been deposited to the ProteomeXchange Consortium (http://proteomecentral.proteomexchange.org) via the PRIDE partner repository with the data set identifier PXD001250. The data set can also be accessed through MaxQB database (http://maxqb.biochem.mpg.de/mxdb/project/show/P009) and for simpler access to key quantitative features: http://www.mousebrainproteome.com/.
Downstream bioinformatics analyses
Bioinformatic analysis was performed in the Perseus software environment. All MS data were mapped to gene symbols for comparison with the RNA-Seq data. We performed two-sample welch t-tests to identify proteins with a significant differential expression in a cell type in comparison to others employing a 2% permutation-based FDR filter. For each cell type, fold expression values were calculated from the individual median averaged protein LFQ intensities and the corresponding median LFQ intensities of the other cell types and their differentiation stages. PCA was performed on the LFQ intensity data.
The Illumina raw reads were binned according to the barcodes and the barcodes and adaptors were trimmed away. The pre-processed reads were then subjected to quality control using FastQC. The quality filtered reads were further aligned to the mouse transcriptome Mus musculus (UCSC version mm10) using Tophat read mapper. RPKM for gene features were then calculated using GenomicRanges and GenomicFeatures packages from the R Bioconductor tool set.
Pathway membership information was obtained from KEGG pathways and categorical annotation was supplied as GO biological process (BP), molecular function (MF), and cellular component (CC). We filtered for 8,147 protein groups that were quantified in all replicates for at least one cell type or its differentiation stage. Differentially expressed proteins were identified by an ANOVA based test at permutation-based FDR cutoff of 0.05. Hierarchical clustering was performed after z-score normalization of the regulated data set and enrichment for annotation categories was evaluated by Fisher exact test to obtain a P value.
The one-dimensional annotation matrix algorithm ranks the protein abundance and tests if the proteins corresponding to every annotation term tend to be ranked higher or lower than the ranking of all proteins in the data set. In this way, it tests and computes the difference of every protein annotation from the overall intensity distribution using the two-sided Wilcoxon-Mann-Whitney test where the multiple hypothesis testing is adjusted by applying a Benjamini-Hochberg FDR threshold of 0.02. For significant cat-egories, a position score (termed s; a number between -1 and 1) is calculated, indicating where the center of the distribution of protein abundance for the annotation category is located relative to the overall distribution of values. We used this algorithm to create an annotation matrix of ‘position score’ for GO annotation terms and KEGG pathways separately for all 27 proteomes applying a P value threshold of 0.005. The replicates were grouped based on cell type and differentiation stage before applying an ANOVA test on the annotation matrix with a permutation-based FDR cutoff of 0.001 to identify annotation terms that are significantly different between at least two groups. The z-scored annotation matrix is supplied as Supplementary Table 10.
Immunocytochemistry
In order to determine the purity of the primary neural cells, every cell culture dish contained two 8-mm round glass cover slips. Before lysis of the cells for RNA isolation or protein analysis, the coverslips were removed and fixed with 4% paraformaldehyde (PFA, wt/vol) in PBS. Cells on the coverslips were immunostained as described. We used antibodies directed against O1 (1:50) and MBP (1:300) (Millipore, AB5864) to stain oligodendrocytes, against GFAP (1:200, GA5, Novocastra and G5601, Promega) for astrocytes, Iba1 (1:1,000, 019-19741, Wako) to label microglia and against p-III-tubulin (1:1,000, T4026, Sigma-Aldrich) or neurofilament 200 kDa (1:80, N0142, Sigma-Aldrich) to visualize neurons. Col11a1 was detected using the polyclonal ab64883 antibody (Abcam) Appropriate fluorescent-labeled antibodies were purchased from Dianova and used in 1:300 dilutions. Samples were analyzed using a Leica DMI 6000 fluorescence microscope with a 40x NA 1.10 plan-apochromat objective. The number of contaminating cells was counted and only cultures of at least 95% purity were included in further experiments.
Immunohistochemistry
The following primary antibodies were used in respective concentrations: Col11a1 (ab64883, Abcam), MBP (SMI94, Covance; DakoCytomation), Lsamp (2G9 DSHD, University of Iowa). As secondary antibodies, appropriate fluorescent-labeled antibodies from Dianova were employed. For tissue processing mice were killed, the tissue was fixed with 4% PFA in PBS, saturated with 30% sucrose (wt/vol) and frozen. Tissue slices of 30 μM were prepared using a Leica CM 1900 Cryostat and mounted onto superfrost slides. Antigen retrieval with 10 mM citrate buffer was performed, sections were permeabilized with 0.5% Triton X-100 (vol/vol) in PBS for 30 min, washed and blocked in blocking solution (5% horse serum and 0.5% Triton X-100 in PBS) for 1 h at 20 °C. Sections were incubated with primary antibodies in 3% horse serum and 0.5% Triton X-100 in PBS at respective concentrations overnight. Next, sections were washed with PBS and incubated with secondary antibodies for 1 h at RT. After washing with PBS, the sections were mounted in fluorescence mounting medium (Dako). For staining with antibodies against Lsamp, Triton X-100 was omitted as it affected the quality of the stainings.
RNA extraction, generation of the cDNA libraries and Illumina RNA-Seq
Cell cultures were washed three times with PBS, approximately 1 million cells were lysed in 750 μl of RLT buffer (Qiagen) and passed through a 27G needle. Samples were stored at −80 °C until RNA preparation. Total RNA was isolated using the RNeasy Mini Kit (Qiagen) according to the manufacturer’s guidelines. RNA concentration was determined using a NanoDrop ND1000 spectrophotometer and RNA integrity was assessed with an Agilent 2100 Bioanalyzer.
For the first round of amplification, cDNA synthesis was performed using 300 ng of RNA and the Superscript III first strand synthesis kit (Life Technologies). A mixture of T7-B primers was used in this reaction. Afterwards, second strand synthesis was performed using DNA Polymerase I and second-strand buffer (Life Technologies). The double-stranded cDNA was purified using a CyScribe GFX Purification kit (GE Healthcare) and used for in-vitro-transcription (MEGAscript T7 Kit, Ambion). The resulting aRNA was purified using a RNeasy Micro column kit (Qiagen).
For the second round of amplification, between 300 and 800 ng of aRNA were mixed with a Dec1-hairpin-N9 primer and first strand synthesis was performed using the Superscript III first strand synthesis kit (Invitrogen). Second strand synthesis was done with a B-short primer and Taq-Polymerase. cDNA was purified with the NuleoSpin Extract II Kit (Macherey & Nagl).
Sequencing codes were introduced by step-out PCR. Therefore, cDNA was mixed with the appropriate Code_Cis40 primers and amplified by PCR using the PWO Master Mix (Roche).
The Illumina sequencing adaptors were introduced in a second PCR using the appropriate primers. Samples were analyzed using Illumina2000 sequencing.
RT-qPCR analysis
Expression of Col11a1 on an mRNA level was confirmed by RT-qPCR analysis as described previously. In brief, 1,000,000 cells were lysed in 1 ml of TRIzol (Life Technologies) and total RNA was isolated according to the manufacturer’s guidelines. cDNA synthesis was performed using 2 μg of total RNA, Oligio(dT)12-18 primer and the Superscript III first strand synthesis kit (life technologies). Quantitative real-time PCR was performed in triplicates using the Power SYBR Green PCR Master Mix (Roche) according to the manufacturer’s recommendations on a Roche LightCycler 480 instrument. For Col11a1, the primers 5’-CAGATTGTGACTTAACATCCAAGG-3’ and 5’-CTCGATTATATCCTCAGGTGCAT-3’ were used, GAPDH was amplified with primers 5’-CAATGAATACGGCTACAGCAAC-3’ and 5’-TTACTCCTTGGAGGCCATGT-3’. Quantification was performed using the ACt method (2-ΔΔt). Data were normalized to GAPDH.
Western blot analysis
Cell cultures were lysed in lysis buffer (1% NP40, 0.1% SDS (vol/vol), 0.25 mM EDTA in PBS) with complete protease inhibitor cocktail (Roche). Proteins were resolved in 7.5% SDS-PAGE gels and transferred to a nitrocellulose membrane. Antibodies against Col11a1 (Abcam) and Calnexin (Stressgen) were used in 1:2,000 dilution, detected with appropriate HRP-conjugated antibodies and visualized by ECL (Amersham).
Electron microscopy
Lsamp knockout mice (C57/BL6J) and wild-type littermates were perfused with 4% PFA and 2.5% glutaraldehyde (vol/vol) in PBS and brains were stored in the fixative. Electron microscopy was performed as described previously. Brains were cut into 300-μm sections using a vibratome and 2-mm punches of the genu of the corpus callosum and the fimbria were prepared. Tissue was embedded in Epon, ultrathin sections were prepared and stained with 1% uranyl acetate (wt/vol) and lead citrate. Electron micrographs were taken on a LEO 912AB electron microscope (Zeiss) using an on-axis 2,048 x 2,048 charge-coupled device camera (Proscan). Blinded quantification was performed by determining areas of the myelinated and unmyelinated axons. The diameter of a circle with that area calculated and g-ratio was determined by dividing axonal diameter by myelinated diameter.
Fc-fusion protein generation and purification
Necl1-Fc and Necl4 -Fc plasmids were kindly provided by E. Peles (Weizmann Institute). The Fc fragment was amplified and inserted into a pcDNA3.1+ plasmid using the primers 5'-AAAAGAGCT CGGAGGAGGAGGAGAT CCCCGT CGTGCAT CTAT C -3’ and 5’-AAA AGGGCCCTCTAGATCATTTACCC -3'. The extracellular domain from Lsamp, Ntm, Opcml and Mcam were amplified and inserted into the Fc plasmid using NheI restriction sites. Soluble Fc-fusion proteins were purified using Protein A HP Spin Trap columns (GE Healthcare), following manufacturer’s instructions. Briefly, HEK cells were transfected as described in the previous section. After 2 -3 d, the supernatant was collected, and centrifuged for 15 min at 4,000g at 4 °C. 1x Complete Protease Inhibitor Cocktail (Roche) was added to the supernatant and then concentrated using Amicon Ultra-15 Centrifugal Filter Units (Millipore) according to manufacturer’s recommendations. The final volume of 2 ml was diluted in equal volume of binding buffer (20 mM sodium phosphate, pH 7.0). Briefly, the storage solution from the column was removed by centrifugation for 30 s at 100g. The column was equilibrated adding 600 μl of binding buffer, centrifuged for 30 s at 100g. Then, 600 μl of the antibody solution were added, incubated for 4 min while gently mixing and then centrifuged for 30 s at 100g. This procedure was repeated until all the volume was loaded on the column. Then the column was washed twice adding 600 μl binding buffer and centrifuging for 30 s at 100g. Two collection tubes per sample were prepared for eluted fractions, each one containing 30 ¡al of neutralizing buffer. The proteins were eluted twice by adding 400 ¡al of elution buffer (0.1 M glycine-HCl, pH 2.7), mixing by inversion, placing the column in a 2 -ml microcentrifuge tube containing 30-jal neutralizing buffer (1 M Tris-HCl, pH 9.0) and centrifuged for 1 min at 50g. The proteins were aliquoted and kept at −20 °C.
Binding assay
For binding assays, supernatant from transfected HEK cells was retrieved and centrifuged 10 min at 5,000g. Per each 18 mm coverslip of neuronal or oligodendroglial culture, 150 μl of media were mixed with 1.5 μl of Cy3-conjugated anti-human Fc antibody (Dianova) and incubated for 30 min at 20 °C. Then, the mix was added to each coverslip and incubated for 20 min at 20 °C in a humid chamber. Finally, the coverslips were washed 3 times with PBS and the cells were fixed with 4% PFA for 15 min at 20 °C.
Adhesion assay
Glass coverslips in a 24-well plate were coated with 500 μl of a solution with 10 ag ml-1 of donkey anti-human Fc antibody (Dianova) in 50 mM Tris-HCl (pH 9.0) and left overnight at 4 °C. Then, the coverslips were washed three times with supplement-free DMEM and 500 μl of a solution containing 10 ag ml-1 of Fc-fusion protein in 0.2% BSA/PBS (wt/vol). After 1 h of incubation at 37 °C, the coverslips were washed threetimes with DMEM and fresh Super Sato media was added. PLL coating (100 μg ml-1) was used as a positive control to verify the quality of the primary oligodendrocyte preparation. After washing and placing new media, 25,000 OPC were plated and allowed to grow for four days, and fixed with 4% PFA.
Statistical analyses
All statistical analyses were performed on at least three different biological replicates. The sample size was similar or higher to those generally employed in the field. Data distribution was assumed to be normal but this was not formally tested. Statistical details are reported in each figure legend. Two sided Fischer’s exact test, Chi-square test, one way ANOVA Dunnett’s multiple comparison, Wilcoxon-Mann-Whitney test and two tailed unpaired t test were performed using the Prism Software package (GraphPad).
A Supplementary Methods checklist is available.