ABSTRACT:
A goal of the Chromosome-centric Human Proteome Project is to identify all human protein species. With 3844 proteins annotated as “missing”, this is challenging. Moreover, proteolytic processing generates new protein species with characteristic neo-N termini that are frequently accompanied by altered half-lives, function, interactions, and location. Enucleated and largely void of internal membranes and organelles, erythrocytes are simple yet proteomically challenging cells due to the high hemoglobin content and wide dynamic range of protein concentrations that impedes protein identification. Using the N-terminomics procedure TAILS, we identified 1369 human erythrocyte natural and neo-N-termini and 1234 proteins. Multiple semitryptic N-terminal peptides exhibited improved mass spectrometric identification properties versus the intact tryptic peptide enabling identification of 281 novel erythrocyte proteins and six missing proteins identified for the first time in the human proteome. With an improved bioinformatics workflow, we developed a new classification system and the Terminus Cluster Score. Thereby we described a new stabilizing N-end rule for processed protein termini, which discriminates novel protein species from degradation remnants, and identified protein domain hot spots susceptible to cleavage. Strikingly, 68% of the N-termini were within genome-encoded protein sequences, revealing alternative translation initiation sites, pervasive endoproteolytic processing, and stabilization of protein fragments in vivo. The mass spectrometry proteomics data have been deposited to ProteomeXchange with the data set identifier <PXD000434>.
METHODS:
Materials and Methods
Organic solvents and HPLC-grade water were purchased from Fisher Scientific (Ottawa, ON, Canada). All other reagents were purchased from Sigma-Aldrich Canada (Oakville, ON, Canada) unless stated otherwise.
Isolation of Red Blood Cells
Human whole blood was obtained from healthy volunteer donors at the University of British Columbia Centre for Blood Research (UBC CBR) Blood Collection Suite according to institutional guidelines and in agreement with the Declaration of Helsinki. EDTA-containing tubes (BD Canada, Mississauga, ON) were used to collect 6 mL of whole blood from each donor. Erythrocytes were enriched using a refined Ficoll-Hypaque density gradient centrifugation strategy similar to that described. First, erythrocytes were collected by centrifugation at 500g, 10 min, 4 °C. Plasma and buffy coat layers were discarded and erythrocytes washed three times with cold PBS (137 mM NaCl, 10 mM Na2HPO4, 2 mM KH2PO4, 3 mM KCl, pH 7.4) diluted to 7 mL total volume and loaded on a single-step 3 mL Ficoll-Hypaque gradient (density 1.114, MP Biomedicals, Santa Ana, CA) 400g, 30 min, 4 °C. The bottom layer containing erythrocytes was collected and seven-fold diluted in phosphate-buffered saline (PBS). Cell counts for erythrocytes, platelets, and white blood cells and the concentration of free hemoglobin were determined using an ADVIA 120 hematology system (Siemens Healthcare Diagnostics, Oakville, ON, Canada). Erythrocytes were collected by centrifugation at 500g, 10 min, 4 °C and enrichment with Ficoll–Hypaque gradient repeated three times until cell counts for platelets and white blood cells were below 1 × 109 cells/L and 0.1 × 109 cells/L, respectively. Finally, erythrocytes were washed twice in 10 mL of PBS and collected by centrifugation.
Proteome Preparation
All further steps were performed on ice unless indicated otherwise. Purified erythrocytes were lysed in 7 mL of lysis buffer (10 mM Hepes, 10 mM EDTA, 1 mM PMSF, 5× HALT! Protease Inhibitor Cocktail (Thermo Fisher Pierce, Nepean, ON, Canada), pH 7.5) and separated into crude soluble and membrane protein fractions by centrifugation at 50 000g, 30 min, 4 °C. Membrane fractions were washed twice in cold lysis buffer, pelleted at 50 000g, and solubilized in 100 mM Hepes, 10 mM EDTA, 1% sodium deoxycholate, 1 mM EDTA, pH 7.5. Supernatants containing soluble proteins were centrifuged at 50 000g for 20 min to remove membrane carryover. For mass spectrometry analyses, some samples (10 mg) were depleted for hemoglobin using the HemoVoid kit (BiotechSupportGroup, Monmouth Junction, NJ) according to manufacturer instructions. Protein concentrations of membrane- and hemoglobin-depleted soluble fractions were estimated using the BCA assay (BioRad Laboratories, Mississauga, ON, Canada), and the concentration of hemoglobin was used as a proxy for the nondepleted soluble fraction.
Enrichment of N-Termini
Protein N termini were enriched from erythrocyte protein fractions essentially as described. Four biological replicates were analyzed for each protein fraction (soluble, hemoglobin-depleted soluble, membrane) typically starting with two aliquots of >2 mg protein pooled from two individual donors. Soluble proteins were denatured and reduced with 3 M guanidine-HCl and 5 mM DTT; membrane proteins we denatured by the addition of 5 mM DTT to the sodium deoxycholate-containing buffer and incubated for 30 min at 65 °C prior to cysteine side chain alkylation with 10 mM iodoacetamide for 45 min at room temperature in the dark. Surplus iodoacetamide was quenched by the addition of 10 mM DTT for 30 min. The pH was adjusted to 6.5 for modification of free amines at the whole protein level (i.e., before digestion with trypsin or GluC) by reductive dimethylation with 40 mM isotopically heavy formaldehyde (13CD2 in D2O, Cambridge Isotopes, Tewksbury, MA) and 20 mM sodium cyanoborohydride (ALD coupling solution, Sterogene, Carlsbad, CA). After reaction overnight at 37 °C, additional 20 mM heavy formaldehyde and 20 mM cyanoborohydride were added and incubated for another 2 to 3 h at 37 °C. The reaction was quenched using 100 mM Tris pH 6.8, 30 min at 37 °C and proteins purified by chloroform/methanol precipitation.
Soluble proteins were resolubilized in a small volume of 50 mM NaOH and directly neutralized with 100 mM Hepes, pH 7.5; membrane proteins were resolubilized in 100 mM Hepes, 1% sodium deoxycholate, pH 7.5. Protein concentrations were estimated again using the BCA assay (BioRad Laboratories), and one aliquot of each fraction was digested with proteomics-grade trypsin (Promega, Madison, WI) and the other with GluC (Worthington Biochemical Corporation, Lakewood, NJ) at a protein/enzyme ratio of 100:1 (w/w) and 50:1 (W/w) overnight at 37 °C. Digest efficiency was checked by SDS-PAGE, and a similar amount of enzyme was added for another 3 to 4 h if necessary. An aliquot of 50–100 μg of tryptic membrane and soluble protein digests was saved for separate proteome-level analysis (“preTAILS”) before adjusting the reaction mix to pH 6.5 and coupling internal and C-terminal peptides to a five-fold excess (w/w) HPG-ALD polymer () by incubation with 20 mM sodium cyanoborohydride at 37 °C overnight. The reaction was quenched by the addition of 100 mM Tris pH 6.8, and peptides were desalted using solid phase extraction (C18plus cartridges, Waters, Mississauga, ON). Each TAILS and preTAILS sample was fractionated by off-line SCX chromatography (Polysulfethyl A, Poly LC, Columbia, MD) using an HPLC system (Agilent 1200, Agilent Technologies, Mississauga, ON, Canada). All peptides were desalted using C18 “omix” tips (Varian, Walnut Creek, CA) prior to MS analysis.
Mass Spectrometry
LC–MS/MS analysis was performed on an nano-LC system (Thermo Scientific, Mississauga, ON, Canada) coupled to a linear ion trap–orbitrap hybrid mass spectrometer (LTQ-Orbitrap XL, Thermo Scientific) using a nanospray ionization source including a fused silica trap column (length 2 cm, inner diameter 100 μm, packed with 5 μm diameter Aqua C-18 beads; Phenomenex, Torrance, CA), fused silica fritted analytical column (length 20 cm, inner diameter 50 μm, packed with 3 μm diameter Reprosil-Pur C-18-AQ beads; Dr. Maisch, Ammerbuch, Germany), and a silica gold-coated spray tip (20 μm inner diameter, 6 μm diameter opening, pulled on a P-2000 laser puller; Sutter Instruments, Novato, CA; coated on EM SCD005 Super Cool Sputtering Device; Leica Microsystems, Concord, ON, Canada). Buffer A consisted of 0.5% acetic acid, and buffer B consisted of 0.5% acetic acid and 80% acetonitrile. Gradients were run from 0 to 15% B over 15 min, then from 15 to 40% B in the next 65 min, then increased to 100% B over 10 min period and held at 100% B for 30 min. The LTQ-Orbitrap was set to acquire a full-range scan at 60 000 resolution from 350 to 1800 Th in the Orbitrap and to simultaneously fragment the top five peptide ions in each cycle in the LTQ (minimum intensity 200 counts). Parent ions were then excluded from MS/MS for the next 180 s. Singly charged ions were excluded from MS/MS. The Orbitrap was continuously recalibrated against protonated (Si(CH3)2O)6 at m/z = 445.120025 using the lock-mass function. Error of mass measurement was usually within 5 ppm. The mass spectrometry proteomics data have been deposited to the ProteomeXchange Consortium () via the PRIDE partner repository with the data set identifier <PXD000434>.
Mass Spectrometry Data Analysis
Acquired MS/MS raw data were converted to the mgf and mzXML format using MS-Convert. Spectra were matched to peptide sequences in the human UniProt protein database release 2013_04 (containing 179 766 sequences including common contaminants and reversed decoy sequences) using Mascot v2.3. (MatrixScience), X!Tandem, and MS-GF+. The following search criteria were used: expected cleavage pattern: semi-ArgC or semi-GluC allowing for three missed cleavages, 15 ppm precursor tolerance, 0.5 Da fragment ion tolerance, fixed Lys heavy dimethylation (+34.063117 Da), fixed Cys carbamidomethylation (+57.021464 Da), variable Met oxidation (+15.994915 Da), variable N terminal acetylation (+42.010565 Da), variable N-terminal heavy dimethylation (+34.063117 Da), variable conversion of N-terminal Glu > pyro-Glu (−18.010565 Da), and variable conversion of N-terminal Gln > pyro-Glu (−17.026549 Da).
All peptide identifications from individual searches with varying search parameters and different search engines were statistically evaluated and integrated using PeptideProphet and iProphet, as implemented in the Trans Proteomic Pipeline (TPP) v4.6 using a false discovery rate cutoff of 1% (Supplementary Table S4 in the Supporting Information). Peptides were grouped and assigned to proteins using the ProteinProphet module of the TPP (Supplementary Table S5 in the Supporting Information). Proteins were included in the analysis of the erythrocyte proteome if they were identified either (i) at an FDR of ≤0.7% on the protein level (ProteinProphet probability ≥0.9) or (ii) at an FDR of ≤1% on the peptide level (initial probability ≤0.88) supported by at least two independent spectra (Supplementary Table S2 in the Supporting Information). This second criterion was chosen to account for N-terminal enrichment by TAILS that reduces the number of identifiable peptides per protein species to one, leading to heavily penalized ProteinProphet probability scores. ProteinProphet was used to determine protein groups sharing the same set of peptides if peptides matched multiple protein sequences. For each protein group, one protein entry was selected as representative. For this selection priority was given for highest probability: canonical proteins over isoforms and curated SwissProt entries over Trembl entries. The N termini are defined according to their position within the sequence of this representative protein sequence and their terminal amino acid modification. Following this definition, the N-terminal peptides identified from trypsin and GluC digested samples are seamlessly mapped onto the same terminus. N-terminal peptides with identical sequence but different N-terminal modification are classified as independent N termini (Supplementary Table S3 in the Supporting Information). Classification of identified peptides as N termini required (i) a N terminus carrying a heavy dimethyl (indicative of a free N terminus in vivo as the labeling is performed at the protein level in TAILS and not at the peptide level as for shotgun analyses) or natural enzymatic modification (acetylation, N-terminal glutamate to pyro-glutamic acid conversion), (ii) a C-terminal residue matching the specificity of the employed digest enzyme (Arg in the case of trypsin which cuts with ArgC specificity due to lysine dimethylation; Asp or Glu in the case of GluC), and (iii) identification by at least two independent spectra. Peptides with N-terminal pyro-Glu derived from cyclization of Gln, a known side reaction under the employed conditions, and peptides with free N termini were used for protein identification only. Classification of protein identifications into known and “missing” proteins was based on neXtProt () classes PE1 (known) and PE2-PE5 (missing), as determined from the respective files downloaded from neXtProt () on 02.12.2013. To confirm the uniqueness and species specificity, peptide sequences representing “missing proteins” were further searched against the ‘nr’ database using the blastp algorithm.
Bioinformatics, Statistical Analysis, and Terminome Mapping
Fisher’s exact test has been used for significance estimation. Gene Ontology enrichment was performed using the DAVID web service, and functional annotation of protein termini was determined using the TopFIND API.
To determine regions in a protein that are susceptible to proteolysis, we developed the terminus cluster score (TCS), which was calculated as follows:The TCS at any position (pos) of the genome-encoded protein sequence is defined as the summation of a contribution value (xi) for each position (i) in the genome encoded sequence. This value xi is formed by the number of termini observed at this position (terminii), divided by a decay factor d which reduces the contribution of the termini count to TCSpos with increasing distance (pos – i) from pos. The decay factor d is formed by the distance (1 + pos – i) divided by a protein length-depending dampening factor (2 + protein length/100) that reduces the decay factor for longer proteins, resulting in increased cluster potential.
To further identify the dominant termini suggesting stable protein species, we further developed the terminus prevalence score (TPS), which we defined as:The TPS at any position (pos) of the genome encoded protein sequence is defined as the total number of spectra supporting a terminus (regardless of modification state) at this position (spectrapos), normalized to the average number of spectra assigned to each terminus, and multiplied by the normalized number of replica in which a terminus has been identified. Finally, the local cluster score (TCSpos) is taken into account to penalize termini within clusters.