ABSTRACT:
Tyrosine kinases (TKs) are central regulators in cellular activities and perturbations of TK signaling contribute to oncogenesis. However, less than half of the TKs have been thoroughly studied and a global functional analysis of their proteomic portrait is lacking. Here we conducted a combined approach of RNA interference (RNAi) and stable isotope labeling with amino acids in cell culture (SILAC)-based quantitative proteomics to decode the TK-regulated proteome and associated signaling dynamics. As a result, a broad proteomic repertoire modulated by TKs was revealed, upon silencing of the 65 TKs expressed in MCF7 breast cancer cells. This yielded 10 new distinctive TK clusters according to similarity in TK-regulated proteome, each characterized by a unique signaling signature in contrast to previous classifications. We provide functional analyses and identify critical pathways for each cluster based on their common downstream targets. Analysis of different breast cancer subtypes showed distinct correlations of each cluster with clinical outcome. From the significantly up- and down-regulated proteins, we identified a number of markers of drug sensitivity and resistance. These data supports the role of TKs in regulating major aspects of cellular activity, but also reveals redundancy in signaling, explaining why kinase inhibitors alone often fail to achieve their clinical aims. The TK-SILACepedia provides a comprehensive resource for studying the global function of TKs in cancer.
METHODS:
EXPERIMENTAL PROCEDURES
RNA Extraction and RT-qPCR
RNeasy kit (Qiagen, Manchester, UK) was used to isolate total RNA. Reverse transcription was performed using high capacity cDNA reverse transcription kit (Applied Biosystems, Warrington, UK). RT-qPCR analysis was performed on a 7900HT Thermocycler (Applied Biosystems) using SYBR® Green master mix and primers for the whole tyrosine kinase family, purchased from Qiagen.
SILAC Cell Culture
To generate SILAC conditions, normal DMEM medium deficient in arginine (R) and lysine (K) was supplemented with stable isotope-encoded arginine and lysine as previously described. For “medium” labeling we used l-[13C6] arginine (R6) and l-[2H4] lysine (K4), and for “heavy” labeling we used l-[13C6, 15N4] arginine (R10) and l-[13C6, 15N2] lysine (K8). For the “light” condition, or unlabeled, l-[12C6,14N4] arginine (R0), and l-[12C6,14N2] lysine (K0) were used. Final concentrations of arginine were 84 mg/L and 146 mg/L of lysine. The tissue culture media (Dundee Cell Products, Dundee, UK) were supplemented with 10% dialyzed fetal bovine serum (FCS) with 10kDa MWCO, 1% (10 mg/ml) streptomycin/(10,000 units/ml) penicillin, 2 mm glutamine, and 1 mm sodium pyruvate. MCF7 cells that were grown for at least seven passages prior to this experiment.
Western Blotting
RIPA buffer (Sigma, Hertfordshire, UK) added with fresh protease and phosphatase inhibitor was used to extract whole cell lysates. Cell pallets were mixed thoroughly with RIPA lysis buffer, and then incubated in ice for 15 min before centrifuging at 15,000 rpm for 15 min at 4 °C. Protein concentration was measured by the bicinchoninic acid (BCA) protein assay (Pierce, Paisley, UK). Lysates were heated with 5× sodium dodecyl sulfates (SDS) sample buffer at 95 °C for 5 min before they were loaded to 10% SDS-PAGE. Samples were then transferred to Hybond ECL super nitrocellulose membranes (GE Healthcare). Subsequently the membranes were blocked in TBS containing 0.1% (v/v) Tween20 and 5% (w/v) nonfat milk for 1 h. The primary antibodies were probed with membranes overnight at 4 °C. The membranes were then washed three times in TBS/Tween for 15 min following incubation with HRP-conjugated secondary antibodies (1:3000 dilution) for 60 min. The membranes were then washed three times again and were detected with enhanced chemiluminescence (ECL). Films were developed using a Konica SRX-1001A x-ray developer. Alternatively, membranes were incubated with IRDye® Donkey anti-mouse or Donkey anti-rabbit secondary antibodies for 60 min and visualized by Odyssey® Fc Imaging System (LI-COR®).
RNAi Screening in MCF7 Cells
The human Tyrosine Kinase family siRNAs from Qiagen was used. The library was supplied in a 96-well format (Qiagen FlexiPlate) and contained a pool of two individual verified siRNAs per well, targeting two different sequences for each gene. The knockdown efficiencies of all siRNAs were validated by RT-qPCR and Western blotting. For RNAi screening, MCF7 cells were grown in SILAC medium as described above for at least seven passages and then seeded into 100 mm dishes. Subsequently, cells were transfected with either siControl or verified siRNAs against the tyrosine kinases (final concentration 40 nm) and HiPerFect reagent according to the manufacturer's instructions (Qiagen) for 72 h in indicated SILAC medium, followed by proteomic analysis.
Protein Digestion and Peptide Fractionation
Equal amounts of protein from unlabeled and labeled samples were combined prior to protein digestion. Briefly, samples were reduced in 10 mm dithiothreitol and alkylated in 50 mm iodoacetamide prior to boiling in loading buffer, and then separated by one-dimensional SDS-PAGE (4–12% Bis-Tris Novex mini-gel, Invitrogen, Paisley, UK) and visualized by colloidal Coomassie staining (Novex, Invitrogen). The entire protein gel lanes were excised and cut into 10 slices each. Every gel slice was subjected to in-gel digestion with trypsin overnight at 37 °C. The resulting tryptic peptides were extracted by formic acid (1%) and acetonitrile (CH3CN), lyophilized in a speedvac, and resuspended in 1% formic acid.
Mass Spectrometry Methods
Trypsin-digested peptides were separated using an Ultimate 3000 RSLC (Thermo Scientific) nanoflow LC system. On average 0.5 μg was loaded with a constant flow of 5 μl/min onto an Acclaim PepMap100 nanoViper C18 trap column (100 μm inner-diameter, 2 cm; Themro Scientific). After trap enrichment, peptides were eluted onto an Acclaim PepMap RSLC nanoViper, C18 column (75 μm, 15 cm; Thermo Scientific) with a linear gradient of 2–40% solvent B (80% acetonitrile with 0.08% formic acid) over 65 min with a constant flow of 300 nl/min. The HPLC system was coupled to a linear ion trap Orbitrap hybrid mass spectrometer (LTQ-Orbitrap Velos, Thermo Scientific) via a nano electrospray ion source (Thermo Scientific). The spray voltage was set to 1.2 kV, and the temperature of the heated capillary was set to 250 °C. Full-scan MS survey spectra (m/z 335–1800) in profile mode were acquired in the Orbitrap with a resolution of 60,000 after accumulation of 1,000,000 ions. The fifteen most intense peptide ions from the preview scan in the Orbitrap were fragmented by collision-induced dissociation (normalized collision energy, 35%; activation Q, 0.250; and activation time, 10 ms) in the LTQ Orbitrap after the accumulation of 10,000 ions. Maximal filling times were 1000 ms for the full scans and 150 ms for the MS/MS scans. Precursor ion charge state screening was enabled, and all unassigned charge states as well as singly charged species were rejected. The dynamic exclusion list was restricted to a maximum of 500 entries with a maximum retention period of 180 s and a relative mass window of 15 ppm. The lock mass option was enabled for survey scans to improve mass accuracy. Data were acquired using the Xcalibur software.
Proteome Quantification
The raw mass spectrometric data files obtained for each experiment were collated into a single quantitated data set using MaxQuant (1.3.0.5.) and the Andromeda search engine software (1.3.0.5.). The sequence database used was from ipi.HUMAN v.3.68 with 87,061 entries. Enzyme specificity was set to that of trypsin, allowing for cleavage N-terminal to proline residues and between aspartic acid and proline residues. Other parameters used were: (1) variable modifications, methionine oxidation, protein N-acetylation, gln → pyro-glu; (2) fixed modifications, cysteine carbamidomethylation; (3) database: target-decoy human MaxQuant; (4) heavy labels: R6K4 and R10K8; (5) MS/MS tolerance: FTMS- 10ppm, ITMS- 0.6 Da; (6) maximum peptide length, 6; (7) maximum missed cleavages, 2; (8) maximum of labeled amino acids, 3; and (9) false discovery rate, 1%. Peptide ratios were calculated for each arginine- and/or lysine-containing peptide as the peak area of labeled arginine/lysine divided by the peak area of nonlabeled arginine/lysine for each single-scan mass spectrum. Peptide ratios for all arginine- and lysine-containing peptides sequenced for each protein were averaged. Data are normalized using 1/median ratio value for each identified protein group per labeled sample. The mass spectrometry proteomics data have been deposited to the ProteomeXchange Consortium via the PRIDE partner repository with the data set identifier PXD002065. Annotated spectra for all results can be accessed using MS-Viewer via the links provided from supplemental Table S5.
Bioinformatics and Statistical Analyses
The bioinformatic analyses were performed in R and SWI-Prolog, using Real for connecting the two systems. Specifically, the hierarchical clustering of SILAC proteomics data after silencing TKs was performed based on calculated distances by R's hclust function. The complete linkage method that aims to find similar clusters based on overall cluster measure was used. For the correlation heatmap, we calculated and plotted pairwise distances between tyrosine kinases according to their protein quantification signatures. The distance metric was conducted using the centered Pearson correlation.
To visualize the TK-modulated proteomics, the heatmap of quantified values showing the overall pattern of regulation was displayed. Individual proteins were plotted in either red for down-regulated proteins, or white for nondifferential and nonidentified, or blue for up-regulated proteins. Significance B test was performed to characterize the most significantly regulated proteins after silencing of TKs (p < 0.05).
For each identified cluster, GO analysis was performed at the level 2 of the three GO domains: biologic process (BP), cellular component (CC), and molecular function (MF). Furthermore, the hyper-geometric test from GOstats package was used to identify GO terms that are enriched in the deregulated genes in each cluster. For every overrepresented GO term, a network connecting deregulated genes in this GO term was drawn showing the networks among these genes in the STRING protein–protein interactions database. Only edges with a confidence value greater than 500 were included (range: 0–999). SWI-Prolog was used for the overall control of our pipeline and the graph operations on the STRING database.
To investigate the effect of our clusters to doxorubicin sensitivity in a panel of breast cancer cell lines, we integrated data from the cancer cell line encyclopedia (CCLE) and drug-response signature from the genomic markers screening of drug sensitivity in cancer (GDSC). From the downstream effects (up- or down-regulated proteins) of each cluster, expression values from CCLE for these genes were regressed against the GDSC IC50 values for doxorubicin for breast cancer cell lines (37 cell lines, linear regression with ANOVA <0.01).
Kaplan-Meier (KM) Plotter Analysis
KM Plotter online survival analysis, which has massive gene expression data and survival information of more than 3000 patients, was used. Gene expression data and relapse free and overall survival information are publically available from the Gene Expression Omnibus (GEO, http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/geo/) and The Cancer Genome Atlas (TCGA). The database is handled by a PostgreSQL server, which integrates gene expression and clinical data simultaneously. To analyze the prognostic value of a particular gene, the patient samples are split into two groups according to quantile expressions of the proposed biomarker. In this study, the mean expression levels of various TKs in each classified cluster were selected. All the 65 identified TKs were examined except EPHA6 in cluster 2 and LMTK3 in cluster 6 because of lack of data. The relevance on relapse free survival (RFS) in luminal A, luminal B, and basal-like breast cancer was assessed. A survival curve with the hazard ratio (HR) with 95% confidence intervals and logrank p value is displayed.