ABSTRACT:
The Spanish slug, Arion vulgaris, is considered one of the hundred most invasive species in Central Europe. The immense and very successful adaptation and spreading of A. vulgaris suggest that it developed highly effective mechanisms to deal with infections and natural predators. Current transcriptomic and proteomic studies on gastropods have been restricted mainly to marine and freshwater gastropods. No transcriptomic or proteomic study on A. vulgaris has been carried out so far, and in the current study, the first transcriptomic database from adult specimen of A. vulgaris is reported. To facilitate and enable proteomics in this non-model organism, a mRNA-derived protein database was constructed for protein identification. A gel-based proteomic approach was used to obtain the first generation of a comprehensive slug mantle proteome. A total of 2128 proteins were unambiguously identified; 48 proteins represent novel proteins with no significant homology in NCBI non-redundant database. Combined transcriptomic and proteomic analysis revealed an extensive repertoire of novel proteins with a role in innate immunity including many associated pattern recognition, effector proteins and cytokine-like proteins. The number and diversity in gene families encoding lectins point to a complex defense system, probably as a result of adaptation to a pathogen-rich environment. These results are providing a fundamental and important resource for subsequent studies on molluscs as well as for putative antimicrobial compounds for drug discovery and biomedical applications.
METHODS:
Methods
Collection of Arion vulgaris
A. vulgaris specimens were collected in May 2014 in a location (48° 19′ 40″ N, 16° 12′ 34″ E) in Woerdern, Austria. A total of 15 specimens ranging from 7 to 8 g were collected. Species identification was carried out with the assistance of the Zoological Department of Museum of Natural History in Vienna (H.S.). According to national law no permission is required to collect and use invertebrates.
Transcriptome sequencing and assembly
Isolation of RNA was performed with the RNeasy kit (Qiagen, Hilden, Germany). Following removal of the gut, two specimens of Arion vulgaris were immersed in liquid nitrogen and pulverized with the help of a mortar and pestle. Pooled total RNA was subjected to RNA-Seq following the mRNA sequencing protocol provided by New England Biolabs (NEBNext kit, NEB, Frankfurt, Germany). The first step in the workflow involved purifying the poly(A)-containing mRNA molecules using two rounds of poly(T)-oligo–attached magnetic beads. After purification, mRNAs were fragmented into small pieces using divalent cations under elevated temperature. The cleaved RNA fragments were copied into first-strand complementary DNA (cDNA) using reverse transcriptase and random primers. This was followed by second-strand cDNA synthesis using DNA polymerase I and RNase H (NEB, Frankfurt, Germany). These cDNA fragments subsequently went through an end-repair process, the addition of a single A base and ligation of the adaptors. The products were then purified and enriched with 15 cycles of PCR (with a size distribution of ~200–250 bp) to create the final cDNA library. Finally, the adaptor-ligated DNA was sequenced for 100 cycles on a HiSeq2000 sequencing system (Illumna, San Diego, USA) in a paired-end manner according to the manufacturer's instructions. The generated reads were filtered and trimmed by prinseq-lite using parameters trim_qual_right 30, min_qual_mean 30, min_len 70, trim_tail_right 6, trim_tail_left 6, and rRNA sequences were removed using SortMeRNA 1.99. Digital normalization (maximal coverage 30) and transcript assembly were performed using Trinity pipeline (release 2013-02-25,).
Transcriptome annotation
Protein-coding sequences were identified in the assembly using the TransDecoder tool and PFAM version 27.0. Sequence similarities were obtained by blastx searches (cut-off E-value 1E-6) of the contigs and predicted CDS, respectively, against the NCBI non-redundant protein database (version July 2014). The assembled transcripts were further annotated with GO terms, PFAM protein domains and Enzyme Commision (EC) numbers using web platform FastAnnotator with the default search parameters. Duplicates and substrings were removed from the translated sequence dataset and resulting protein sequences were post-assembled using an in-house script to reduce redundancy. Final assembly containing 47,451 non-redundant protein sequences were used as an expression dataset for MS protein identification.
Protein extraction
Individuals of A. vulgaris were frozen immediately after harvest in liquid nitrogen and stored at -80°. Mantles were dissected directly before protein extraction procedure and homogenized in urea buffer (7 M urea, 2 M thiourea, 4% CHAPS, 2 M Tris (pH 8.8), 0.5% Carrier (3–11 pH), 1% DTT, 1 mM EDTA, 1 mM PMSF, Protease Inhibitor C). Protein samples were cleaned using a 2-DE clean up kit (BioRad, Hercules, CA, USA) and protein concentration was estimated by the Pierce 660 kit (ThermoScientific, Rockford, USA).
Two dimensional gel electrophoresis (2-DE) and nano-LC-ESI-MS/MS analysis
2-DE was performed as reported previously with minor modifications. 750 μg of proteins were loaded on 18 cm 3–11 linear IPG strips (GE Healthcare). IEF was performed in a IPGphore electrophoretic system (GE Healthcare, Uppsala, Sweden) using a protocol with gradually increasing voltage from 200 to 8,000 V at 4 V/min. Prior to second dimension electrophoresis, IPG strips were incubated in 10 ml of equilibration buffer (50 mM Tris-HCl, pH 8.8, 6 M urea, 30% glycerol, 2% SDS and 0.002% bromophenol blue) containing 1% DTT for 15 min with gentle shaking followed by incubation in 10 mL of equilibration buffer with 4% iodoacetamide. The second-dimensional separation was performed on 10–16% gradient SDS-PAGE gels. After fixation for 4 h in 50% methanol and 10% acetic acid, gels were stained overnight with the colloidal coomassie blue (Novex life technologies, Invitrogen, CA). Molecular masses were determined by comparison with precision protein standard markers (#1610373, BioRad, Hercules, CA, USA) spanning the 10 to 250 kDa molecular weight range. All spots were excised from 2-DE gels and digested with trypsin and/or chymotrypsin. The gel pieces were cut into small pieces and washed with 50% ACN in 10mM ammonium bicarbonate for 20 min with vortexing and then 20 min with 10mM ammonium bicarbonate. These two steps were repeated until the gel was completely destained. 100% ACN was added for 10min and gel pieces were dried completely using a SpeedVac concentrator for 30 min at 30°C. Cysteine residues were reduced with 10 mM DTT at 56°C for 30 min and alkylated with 55 mM iodoacetamide for 45 min at 22°C. After washing with 10 mM ammonium bicarbonate and dehydratation with 100% ACN, proteins were digested with 12.5 ng/μL trypsin (Promega, Mannheim, Germany) solution buffered in 10 mM ammonium bicarbonate for 16 h (overnight) at 37°C. The supernatant was transferred to new LoBind 0.5 mL tubes and peptides were extracted with 1% formic acid and then with 15% ACN/0.1% formic acid. 20 uL of extracted peptides were analyzed by nano-LC-ESI-(CID/ETD)-MS/MS essentially as described previously. The HPLC used was an Ultimate 3000 system (Dionex Corporation, Sunnyvale, CA) equipped with a PepMap100 C-18 trap column (300 μm× 5 mm) and PepMap100 C-18 analytical column (75 μm× 250 mm). The gradient was (A = 0.1% formic acid in water, B = 0.08% formic acid in ACN) 4–30% B from 0 to 105 min, 80% B from 105 to 110 min, 4% B from 110 to 125 min. The Amazon speed ETD (Bruker Daltonics, Bremen, Germany) was used to record peptide spectra over the mass range of m/z 400–1,400, and MS/MS spectra in information-dependent data acquisition over the mass range of m/z 100–2,800. Repeatedly, MS spectra were recorded followed by three data-dependent CID MS/MS spectra. An active exclusion of 0.4 min after two spectra was used to detect low abundant peptides. The voltage between ion spray tip and spray shield was set to 1,400 V. Drying nitrogen gas was heated to 150°C and the flow rate was 3 L/min. The collision energy was set automatically according to the mass and charge state of the peptides chosen for fragmentation. Multiple charged peptides were chosen for MS/MS experiments due to their good fragmentation characteristics. MS/MS spectra were interpreted and peak lists were generated by Data Analysis 4.1 (Bruker Daltonics, Bremen, Germany).
One dimensional (1-D) SDS-PAGE and LC-MS/MS
Although 2-DE followed by LC-MS/MS is a proven method for protein separation and identification, it suffers from poor sensitivity, poor representation of very acidic or basic proteins and low solubility of hydrophobic proteins. Therefore, we also separated proteins by 1-D SDS-PAGE coupled with high resolution LC−MS/MS. 50 μg of extracted proteins were mixed with Laemmli buffer (150 mM Tris HCl pH 6.8, 300 mM DTT, 6% SDS, 0.3% bromophenol blue, 30% glycerol) at a 1:3 volume ratio. Proteins in each sample were separated by 10% SDS-PAGE and stained by Blue silver. After destaining with Milli-Q water, gels were cut into 12 slices with proteins of different mass. Proteins underwent in-gel trypsin digestion as above and were analyzed using a LTQ-Orbitrap Velos (ThermoFisher Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA) coupled with nano-LC (Dionex Ultimate 3000) as described previously.
Database search
Data generated from Amazon speed ETD for each of the 2-DE protein spots were analyzed by searching the mRNA-derived Arion vulgaris database (47,451 sequences) including 115 commonly observed contaminants with Mascot Search enigma (version 2.4) using the Mascot Daemon interface (Matrix Science, London, UK). Detailed search criteria were used as follows; enzyme: trypsin or chymotrypsin with a maximum of two missing cleavage sites; search mode: MS/MS ion search with decoy database search included; fixed modification: carbamidomethylation (C); variable modification: oxidation (M); search mode: MS/MS ion search with decoy database search included; peptide mass tolerance 0.35 Da; MS/MS mass tolerance ± 0.35 Da.
For the mass spectrometry data generated from the LTQ Orbitrap Velos, the MS raw files were first processed with Proteome Discoverer 1.4 (ThermoFisher Scientific, IL, USA) to generate separate Mascot generic files. The database search was performed using Mascot version 2.4 (MatrixScience, London, UK) against the combined database as mentioned above. The search criteria were 10 ppm for precursor and 0.5 Da for fragments; search mode: MS/MS ion search with decoy database search included; fixed modification: carbamidomethyl (cysteine); variable modification: oxidation (methionine).
Peptide identifications were filtered to a < 1% false discovery rate (FDR) using the target-decoy strategy. Acceptance parameter for protein identification was a minimum of one unique peptide and two distinct peptides.